C H A P T E R

16

Thalamus
Robert P. Vertes1, Stephanie B. Linley2, Henk J. Groenewegen3, Menno
P. Witter4
1Center

for Complex Systems and Brain Sciences, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, USA; 2Department
of Psychology, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, USA; 3VU University Medical Center, Department of
Anatomy and Neurosciences, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 4Kavli Institute for Systems Neuroscience and Centre
for Neural Computation, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway

O U T L I N E
Some General Aspects of Thalamic Organization

336

Functional Subdivisions of the Thalamus
Classical Subdivisions
Non-classical Subdivisions

337
337
337

Categorization of Thalamic Afferents as “Drivers”
or “Modulators”

338

Reciprocity of Thalamo-Corticothalamic
Relationships339
Lateral Geniculate Nucleus
Dorsal Lateral Geniculate Nucleus
Afferent and Efferent Projections

Ventral Lateral Geniculate Nucleus
Afferent and Efferent Projections

Intergeniculate Leaflet
Afferent and Efferent Projections

340
340
340

341
341

341
341

Functional Aspects of the Lateral Geniculate
Complex342
Ventral Posterior Complex
Afferent and Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

342
343
345

Posterior Nucleus
Afferent and Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

345
346
346

Ventral Posterior Parvicellular Region
Gustatory and Visceral Nuclei

346
346

Afferent and Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

347
347

The Rat Nervous System, Fourth Edition
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-374245-2.00016-4	

Medial Geniculate Nucleus
Afferent and Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

347
348
349

Ventral Anterior and Ventral Lateral Nuclei
Afferent and Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

349
350
350

Ventral Medial Nucleus
Afferent and Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

351
351
352

Mediodorsal Nucleus
Afferent and Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

352
353
354

Submedial Nucleus
Afferent and Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

355
355
356

Anterior Nuclei
Afferent and Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

356
356
358

Lateral Nuclei
Afferent and Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

360
360
361

Intralaminar Nuclei
Afferent Projections
Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

362
362
363
365

335

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

336

16. THALAMUS

Midline Nuclei
Afferent Projections
Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

365
366
367
370

Reticular Nucleus
Afferent and Efferent Projections
Functional Aspects

372
372
374

The thalamus of rats, like in most other vertebrate
s­ pecies, forms the largest part of the diencephalon. The
diencephalon, situated between the cerebral cortex rostrally and the brainstem caudally, consists of several
nuclear cell groups: the epithalamus, the dorsal thalamus,
the ventral thalamus, and the hypothalamus. An alternative nomenclature for major subdivisions of the thalamus,
based on the developmental genetic maps of Puelles and
co-workers (see Chapter 1, Gene Maps and Related Histogenetic Domains in the Forebrain and Midbrain), is the thalamus
(prosomere 2) for the dorsal thalamus, and the prethalamus (prosomere 3) for the ventral thalamus. Accordingly,
these terms will be used (thalamus and prethalamus) to
designate what has classically been referred to as the dorsal and ventral thalamus, respectively.
The (dorsal) thalamus has close connectional and functional relationships with the cortex and, to a lesser extent,
with several forebrain structures including the basal ganglia and amygdala. The (ventral) prethalamus, ontogenetically originating from embryonic cells rostral to those
forming the thalamus, is a heterogeneous collection of
nuclei that would include the reticular nucleus (RT) and
the ventral lateral geniculate nucleus. A discussion of the
epithalamus (epiphysis, habenular complex, and stria
medullaris) falls outside the scope of the chapter.
The thalamus forms a diverse and complex set of cytoarchitectonically, chemoarchitectonically, and hodologically distinct nuclei, their common characteristic being
reciprocal connections with distinct parts of the cortex.
Traditionally, the thalamus has been viewed as the final
relay for extrinsic and intrinsic information channeled
to the cortex. On the basis of the content of information
reaching various thalamic nuclei through select inputs,
as well as organizational aspects of thalamic projections to the cortex, thalamic nuclei have been characterized as specific versus nonspecific. Although this
distinction (specific vs. non-specific) has become less
sharply defined, the specific nuclei have traditionally
encompassed sensory, motor, and associational nuclei
of thalamus, whereas the “nonspecific” nuclei primarily
consist of the midline and intralaminar nuclei of thalamus. A global view of thalamic function is that various
streams of information channeled through the thalamus
to the cortex are gated and modulated at the level of the
thalamus. However, the precise nature and mechanisms

Acknowledgments374
References374

of these gating and modulatory functions still remain
largely elusive.
Main features of the prethalamus, exemplified by the
thalamic reticular (RT) nucleus and the ventral lateral
geniculate (VLG) nucleus, are that it distributes to the
other thalamic nuclei, and unlike them, lacks projections
to the cortex (Sherman and Guillery, 2006; Jones, 2007).
While the reticular and ventral lateral geniculate nuclei
have several characteristics in common, the VLG has a
number of additional properties that distinguish it from
RT and as such VLG will be discussed in conjunction
with the lateral geniculate complex.
The present chapter will provide a general review of the
functional anatomy of the thalamus, with emphasis on data
obtained from studies in rats. For a further treatment of the
thalamus, involving several species, the reader is referred
to two excellent volumes on the thalamus: Exploring the
Thalamus and its Role in Cortical Function, 2nd edn. (2006), by
S. Murray Sherman and R.W. Guillery; and The Thalamus,
Volumes I and II (2007), by the late Edward G. Jones.
Whereas the thalamus has been traditionally viewed
as a “mere” gateway to the cortex, recent evidence
indicates a much greater role for the thalamus in subcortical/cortical communication. As discussed herein,
knowledge of the functional aspects of the thalamus has
greatly expanded over the past decade—with much still
to be discovered. The present chapter builds on previous
comprehensive treatments of the thalamus in this series
by Price (1995) and by Groenewegen and Witter (2004).
This revised chapter aims to update knowledge of the
anatomy of the rat thalamus within a functional context.
In the first section, a number of issues of general interest on thalamic structure and function are discussed followed by a detailed description of different groups of
thalamic nuclei. Emphasis is placed on those nuclei (or
nuclear groups) for which recent research has yielded
new data/insights, as is particularly the case for the
midline and intralaminar nuclei of thalamus.

SOME GENERAL ASPECTS OF THALAMIC
ORGANIZATION
The delineation of nuclei of the thalamus is primarily based on cytoarchitectonic, chemoarchitectonic, and

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Functional Subdivisions of the Thalamus

connectional features. The entire complex of nuclei,
­rostrally, laterally, and ventrally is “encapsulated” by the
fibers of the external medullary lamina in which the RT
is embedded. An internal medullary lamina separates
dorsal and medial groups of the thalamus from ventral,
lateral and posterior nuclei. Embedded in the internal
medullary lamina are the intralaminar nuclei which,
with some of the midline nuclei of thalamus, form a
separate group based in part on their projections to the
cortex as well as to subcortical sites prominently including the basal ganglia.
The caudal borders of the thalamus are less clearly
defined; nuclei of the posterior thalamic complex merge
with cell groups of the pretectum. In rats, as for some
other species, the third ventricle does not extend dorsally from the hypothalamus through thalamus due to
the merging of the two halves of the thalamus in the
midline. The reticular thalamic nucleus, as part of the
prethalamus, forms a thin sheet of neurons at the rostral
and lateral borders of the thalamus, surrounded by fiber
bundles of the internal capsule.

FUNCTIONAL SUBDIVISIONS OF THE
THALAMUS
Classical Subdivisions
The classical categorization of thalamic nuclei is
primarily based on the kinds and sources of information which are transferred through a particular
thalamic nucleus (or group of nuclei) to the cortex.
Traditionally, the thalamus has been divided into three
anatomical/functional groups: the principal (or relay)
nuclei, the association nuclei, and the midline and
intralaminar nuclei (Price, 1995; Groenewegen and
Witter, 2004). The main category is formed by the principal “relay” nuclei which receive specific sensory or
motor information primarily through ascending pathways and transmit this information to discrete areas
and layers of the cortex. The relay nuclei include: the
lateral geniculate complex, medial geniculate nucleus,
ventral posteromedial and posterolateral nuclei, posterior nucleus, ventral lateral nucleus, ventral anterior
nucleus and the ventral medial nucleus. The “association” nuclei are a largely ill-defined group that essentially differ from principal nuclei in that they do not
receive afferent information from primary sensory
(e.g., retina) or motor sources and essentially do not
target primary sensory and motor fields of the cortex.
The association nuclei are thought to receive major
afferents from layer 5 pyramidal cells of primary sensorimotor cortices and to relay this information to
associational areas of cortex—hence association nuclei
of thalamus.

337

Sherman and Guillery (2006) describe two basic
types of thalamic relays, first and higher order relays,
with the difference being that the first order relays
receive, and then transmit, new (or previously unseen)
information to the cortex; whereas higher order relays
convey messages from one cortical area to another—or
information that has already been processed by the cortex. In their view, this distinction precludes the need
for the classification “association nuclei” of thalamus
(see also below). In the classic tradition, the association
thalamic nuclei include the mediodorsal nucleus (MD),
the anterior nuclei (anterodorsal, anteroventral, and
anteromedial), submedial nucleus, and the laterodorsal and lateral posterior nuclei (Groenewegen and
Witter, 2004). The midline and intralaminar thalamic
nuclei form a separate group primarily based on their:
(1) distinct location along the midline and within the
internal medullary lamina; (2) substantial distribution
to subcortical as well as to cortical sites; and (3) seeming involvement in processes of arousal and attention.
The intralaminar group consists of the central medial,
paracentral, central lateral, parafascicular and subparafascicular nuclei, while the midline nuclei include the
paratenial (PT), paraventricular (PV), rhomboid (RH)
and reuniens (RE) nuclei—and in some classifications
the intermediodorsal nucleus (IMD) (Groenewegen
and Witter, 2004). As indicated, the reticular thalamic
nucleus comprises a separate category in light of its
position between (dorsal) thalamic nuclei and the cortex and its absence of cortical projections.

Non-Classical Subdivisions
An alternative classification might group thalamic
nuclei according to their connections with sensorimotor
systems or with the limbic system—and associated roles
in sensorimotor or limbic functions. Like the previously
described categorization, this classification might also
yield three groupings of thalamic nuclei: sensorimotor
nuclei of thalamus, limbic nuclei of thalamus, and thalamic nuclei that may bridge these two domains. While
there is undoubtedly overlap in the anatomical/functional properties of these three groups (as for the classical divisions), the sensorimotor group would essentially
consist of the principal thalamic nuclei; the “limbic
group” would mainly include the anterior nuclei, MD,
central medial nucleus and midline nuclei (PT, PV, RH
and RE), and the sensorimotor/limbic “bridging nuclei”
might consist of the submedial nucleus, the paracentral,
central lateral, and parafascicular nuclei of the intralaminar complex, and the laterodorsal and lateral posterior nuclei of the lateral thalamus. This organization
will be discussed in the chapter—and specifically the
notion of the “limbic thalamus” (Bentivoglio et al., 1991;
Groenewegen and Berendse, 1994; Taber et al., 2004).

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

338

16. THALAMUS

CATEGORIZATION OF THALAMIC
AFFERENTS AS “DRIVERS” OR
“MODULATORS”
Before dealing with the structure, connections, and
functional aspects of individual thalamic nuclei in later
sections, it is important to briefly discuss the characterization of afferents to the thalamus as drivers or
modulators (Sherman and Guillery, 1998, 2001, 2006).
This classification provides a basis for distinguishing
between afferents that carry specific information to the
thalamus, which is subsequently transmitted to the
cortex, and other systems that modulate the transfer of
(specific) information from thalamus to cortex. Sherman
and Guillery (2001, 2006) make a strong case for such
an organization primarily based on first-order sensory
thalamic nuclei such as the lateral geniculate nucleus,
and suggest that these organizational principles can be
extended to other (or higher order) nuclei of the thalamus (but see below). The designation of thalamic afferents as drivers and modulators involves several criteria
including the site and mode of termination of afferent
fibers, their ultrastructural characteristics, and physiological properties (see Table 7.1, pages 256, 257 of Sherman and Guillery, 2006). Primary sensory afferents to
thalamus, whether of somatosensory, visual, or auditory
origin, are similar with respect to their light microscopic
appearance: relatively thick, richly branching terminal fibers with, in most cases, large boutons, although
variable in shape and number. These fibers have been
termed type II fibers and are considered to be “drivers”
for the primary sensory relay nuclei. At the ultrastructural level, the driving afferents are associated with large
terminals containing round vesicles (RL=round vesicles
and large terminals). The RL-type terminals are often
found in triadic arrangements; that is, they are presynaptic to dendrites of thalamic relay neurons as well as to
axoniform dendrites of interneurons which in turn are
presynaptic to dendrites of relay neurons. These triads
regularly form part of glomerular structures containing
various presynaptic and postsynaptic elements, typically
ensheathed by astrocytic processes. A defining characteristic of “drivers” is that they rather faithfully transmit
incoming signals through the thalamus to target neurons in recipient cortical zones. Accordingly, as noted by
Sherman and Guillery (2006), drivers “can reasonably be
regarded as bringing to the thalamus the message that is
passed to cortex, whatever that message may prove to
be” (p. 85). In general, driver inputs are excitatory and
exert their effect mainly via ionotropic glutamate receptors (Sherman and Guillery, 2001, 2006).
By contrast, “modulators,” as the term implies, represent thalamic afferents that modulate (or modify) information carried by the drivers to the cortex. Modulators

have a different light microscopic appearance: fibers are
thin and imbued with small, drumstick-like appendices strung along the extent of the fibers. They are categorized as type I thalamic afferents. In general, type I
fibers more sparsely branch, contain fewer terminallike structures, and distribute over wider regions than
type II fibers. Ultrastructurally, type I fibers have small
terminals with round vesicles (RS=round vesicles and
small terminals). The receptive fields of type I afferents
are generally wide and less defined than those of type II
fibers, and instances in which type I fibers are glutamatergic, they probably exert effects primarily via metabotropic glutamatergic receptors.
Cortical afferents to a number of higher order thalamic nuclei are of the type II category indicating that
these afferents serve as drivers for association thalamic
nuclei. Whereas type I corticothalamic axons mainly
derive from layer 6 of the cortex, type II corticothalamic
fibers have been shown, in many cases, to arise from
cells in cortical layer 5. However, the generality of this
organization remains to be largely established, particularly for non-principal nuclei of the thalamus. Type I
afferents to the thalamus of the “modulatory” category
not only originate in the deeper layers of the cortex but
also from a wide array of subcortical structures in the
basal forebrain, diencephalon and brainstem (Sherman
and Guillery, 2001, 2006).
The concept of drivers and modulators provides a
challenging framework for the discussion and interpretation of thalamic structure and function. It serves as the
basis for understanding what messages are transferred
through the thalamus to the cortex and the systems
modulating this flow of information. It further emphasizes that the sheer numbers or volume of afferents to the
thalamus may not be the major factor in determining the
precise nature of information transfer from the thalamus
to the cortex. Specifically, for some systems numerically
smaller inputs can exert a greater functional influence
than more numerous ones (Sherman and Guillery, 2001,
2006). For instance, retinal afferents to the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) represent only about 7% of the total
synapses on relay cells of LGN (Van Horn et al., 2000).
Despite this, it is clearly the case that retinal signals prevail over information carried by more numerous modulatory inputs to LGN. This, in part, owes to the fact that
retinal fibers end as RL terminals on proximal dendrites
of LGN neurons (Sherman and Guillery, 2006).
The driver/modulator concept, as briefly described,
serves as a reference for the discussion of individual
thalamic nuclei in subsequent parts of the chapter. As a
general framework, however, some caveats should be
addressed. The scheme (drivers/modulators) of Sherman
and Guillery (2001, 2006) largely focuses on, and is generally applicable to, principal (relay) nuclei of the thalamus

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Reciprocity of Thalamo-Corticothalamic Relationships

and may be less relevant to other (or non-principal) nuclei
of the thalamus. What probably distinguishes principal
thalamic nuclei (e.g., visual, auditory, somatosensory)
from other thalamic groups is the rather unambiguous
ability to identify “driving” inputs to these nuclei—
thereby allowing for a clear distinction between drivers
and modulators. In this instance, modulators represent all
other sources of input to the principal nuclei. Although
in some cases, as noted previously, driving inputs to
higher order thalamic nuclei originate from layer 5 cells
of the cortex, for most thalamic nuclei the identification
of “drivers” appears problematic—or has not even been
attempted. In this regard, a main difficulty is the inability to precisely define the receptive fields of neurons in
non-principal thalamic nuclei—to thereby determine the
message(s) transmitted by these nuclei to the cortex. Sherman and Guillery (2006) addressed this issue as follows:
Thus, for relay cells of the lateral geniculate nucleus, we can
define drivers as primary transmitters of receptive field properties and modulators as inputs that do not provide the basic
receptive field properties to the relay cell. This distinction may
also serve for some of the other first order thalamic relays, such
as the ventral posterior nucleus and the medial geniculate nucleus, where receptive field properties of the relay cells are well
understood. However, this criterion will not serve to distinguish
drivers from modulators in other thalamic nuclei where receptive field have not been defined. Examples include the medial
dorsal nucleus, midline and intralaminar nuclei, much of the
pulvinar and other nuclei (p. 258).

Although the authors proceed to describe several
additional criteria for distinguishing drivers from modulators, the effectiveness of these criteria in differentiating drivers from modulators in non-principal thalamic
nuclei remains to be determined.

RECIPROCITY OF THALAMOCORTICOTHALAMIC RELATIONSHIPS
It is almost a dogma that the thalamo-corticothalamic
relationships are organized such that each cortical area
receiving an input from a specific thalamic nucleus faithfully reciprocates this input through a topographically
organized cortical projection to that thalamic nucleus.
Apart from the fact that relationships between the thalamus and cortex are not exclusively reciprocal (Hoogland
et al., 1987; Murphy and Sillito, 1996; Deschênes et al.,
1998; McFarland and Haber, 2002), it is far from clear
what this reciprocity means and why corticothalamic
fibers significantly outnumber their thalamocortical counterparts (Jones, 1985, 2007). With respect to
the discussion of driver and modulatory inputs to the
thalamus, it must be recalled that cortical outputs form
a mixed population. Whereas most cortical afferents

339

to primary relay nuclei are type I modulatory fibers,
­cortical inputs to higher order thalamic nuclei are type
II fibers and thus may represent a main driving input to
these nuclei (Sherman and Guillery, 2001, 2006). Driver
inputs, by terminating on more proximal parts of dendrites of thalamic neurons, appear to exert a stronger
influence on these cells than modulatory inputs which
generally contact more distal parts of dendrites. Therefore, as Sherman and Guillery (2006) argue, it may not be
the numbers that matter, but more the type and position
of terminations on the dendritic tree.
Another approach to the issue of reciprocity has
been set forth by Deschênes et al. (1998) in comparing
the pattern and strength of cortical inputs to a particular thalamic nucleus with extra-thalamic projections to
the nucleus. Deschênes et al. (1998) formulated the “rule
of parity” which states that, “the distribution of corticothalamic projections across and within thalamic nuclei
is determined by the branching patterns of the different
classes of prethalamic afferents.” In effect, corticothalamic projections may exceed thalamocortical projections but corticothalamic projections may largely match
extra-thalamic inputs to particular thalamic nuclei.
In general, the rule of parity leads to reciprocity in the
thalamocorticothalamic relationships, but this may not
be true in all cases. Deschênes et al. (1998) based their
hypothesis on the central organization of the vibrissal
system of rats using the ventrobasal thalamic complex.
The functional consequence of the rule of parity might
be a negation of an exclusive feedback role for the corticothalamic system. Thus, depending on the behavioral
context, either the corticothalamic or the thalamocortical system might play the dominant role. How and to
what extent the varying roles of corticothalamic fibers
are related to their origin from distinct layers of cortex
remain to be established. Whether a rule of parity applies
to all thalamic systems is unclear, but this hypothesis
provides an important perspective on the bottom-up and
top-down functional arrangements of the corticothalamic
system. A likely consequence of nonreciprocity appears
to be that the thalamus channels information between
regions of the cortex as well as between cortical and subcortical structures (Guillery, 1995; McFarland and Haber,
2002; Sherman and Guillery, 2006). This may be a general
principle of thalamocortical organization. As pointed out
by Sherman and Guillery (2006), the thalamus is generally viewed as delivering information to the cortex and
once information reaches the cortex the function of the
thalamus is complete. The cortex then begins the important task of interpreting, organizing and acting on that
information. But this “corticocentric” view of thalamocortical relationships may significantly underestimate
the role of the thalamus in virtually all aspects cortical
functioning—a full partner with the cortex.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

340

16. THALAMUS

LATERAL GENICULATE NUCLEUS
The lateral geniculate nucleus of rats is a relatively
flattened, oval-shaped nucleus on the dorsolateral surface of the caudal thalamus. It is subdivided into dorsal
(DLG) and ventral (VLG) lateral geniculate nuclei. The
intergeniculate leaflet (IGL) is positioned between the
DLG and the VLG. The DLG constitutes the main thalamic relay of visual information to the primary visual
cortex. The VLG can be further divided into a lateral and
medial division. The VLG shares a number of characteristics with the thalamic reticular nucleus, as its lateral
part receives direct retinal input. The IGL constitutes a
relay between the retina and the hypothalamus and is
involved in circadian functions. (For a comprehensive
treatment of the anatomical and functional aspects of
the lateral geniculate complex, including the DLG, VLG,
and IGL see Visual System, Chapter 30.)

Dorsal Lateral Geniculate Nucleus
The dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (DLG) can be
readily identified in Nissl-stained sections, in acetylcholinesterase-stained sections wherein the DLG shows
moderate activity (Paxinos and Watson, 2014), and
in serotonin stained tissue in which DLG shows very
dense fiber labeling (Vertes et al., 2010). The cytoarchitecture of the DLG of rats is rather homogeneous. The
majority of dorsal lateral geniculate neurons are thalamocortical projection cells. Unlike most other principal
thalamic nuclei of the rat, the DLG contains several types
of interneurons, namely, GABAergic, NADPH diaphorase-containing neurons, and those co-expressing both
substances (Ohara et al., 1983; Jones, 1985, 2007; Gabbott
and Bacon, 1994). In contrast to many other mammalian
species, the rat DLG is not clearly laminated, although
fiber bundles running in a ventrolateral to dorsomedial
direction, parallel to the optic tract, impose a certain
orientation on the neurons of the DLG. However, optic
fibers from the ipsilateral and contralateral eyes in the
caudolateral part of DLG remain segregated and create a “hidden lamination,” with the lateral “outer shell”
of DLG receiving input from the contralateral eye. The
medial part of DLG, called the “inner core,” consists of
two regions: the most medial region receives input from
the contralateral eye and the lateral region is innervated
by the ipsilateral eye (Jones, 1985, 2007; Reese, 1988).
Calcium-binding proteins are differentially distributed
in fibers and neurons of the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus. Whereas calretinin and parvalbumin are present only in fibers, calbindin D28K is also expressed in
(inter)neurons, in particular in the outer shell (Luth et al.,
1993; Paxinos et al., 1999). The plexus of calretinin fibers
is most dense in the outer shell (Paxinos et al., 1999).

Parvalbumin fibers likely originate from the retina and
the reticular thalamic nucleus, and calretinin fibers from
the retina (Arai et al., 1992; Luth et al., 1993). Calbindin
D28K-containing fibers may be derived from the superior colliculus (Lane et al., 1997).
Afferent and Efferent Projections
The DLG forms the main relay between the retina
and the primary visual cortex (area 17 or V1). The optic
terminations in the DLG are retinotopically organized
(Jones, 1985, 2007; Reese, 1988). The inner core receives,
in its two ocular laminae, inputs from the contralateral
nasal and the ipsilateral temporal retina, mapping the
contralateral visual hemifield. The outer shell receives a
projection only from the contralateral visual hemifield.
These retinotopic maps in the contralateral and ipsilateral laminae of DLG are in complete register. Lines of
projection are oriented rostroventromedially from the
optic tract at the thalamic surface through the different
laminae of DLG (Reese, 1988). Retinal inputs terminate
as RL-type boutons, indicating that retinal fibers are the
“drivers” of the DLG (Jones, 1985, 2007; Sherman and
Guillery, 2001, 2006). The retinal afferents contact dendrites of both thalamocortical neurons and interneurons.
Cortical inputs to the DLG mainly derive from the
primary visual cortex (area 17). The various cortical layers of the primary visual cortex have different projection
patterns to the visual thalamus (Bourassa and Deschênes,
1995). Fibers originating in the upper part of layer 6 project to the DLG and terminate in rostrocaudally oriented
bands or “rods” that run parallel to the lines of projection of retinal afferents. Neurons in the deeper part of
layer 6 project to the lateral part of the lateral posterior
thalamic nucleus and give off collaterals to the DLG,
where they participate in the formation of the rods. Neurons in layer 5 of the visual cortex send projections to the
brainstem, with collaterals to the ventral lateral geniculate nucleus, lateral posterior nucleus, and lateral dorsal
thalamic nucleus (Bourassa and Deschênes, 1995). Layer
6 corticothalamic fibers send collaterals to the reticular
thalamic nucleus but layer 5 axons do not. The fibers
terminating in DLG that originate from layer 6 have
small “en passant” varicosities which at the ultrastructural level show characteristics of the RS-type boutons
and may be considered “modulators” (Jones, 1985, 2007;
Bourassa and Deschênes, 1995; Price, 1995; Sherman and
Guillery, 2001, 2006).
Subcortical inputs to DLG arise from the ventral
lateral geniculate nucleus, reticular thalamic nucleus,
superior colliculus, and several brainstem nuclei (Reese,
1988; Coleman and Mitrofanis, 1996; Moore et al., 2000).
The inputs from the superior colliculus terminate in the
peripheral zone of the outer shell and are likely associated with the calbindin D28K-positive fiber plexus
(Reese, 1988; Lane et al., 1997). Brainstem afferents to

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Lateral Geniculate Nucleus

DLG originate from the some of the same nuclei giving
rise to projections to the retina including the nucleus of
the optic tract, pretectal nuclei, and the parabigeminal
nuclei (Schmidt et al., 1995; Born and Schmidt, 2007). A
strong serotonergic input to DLG arises from the dorsal raphe nucleus (Papadopoulos and Parnavelas, 1990;
Vertes, 1991; Waterhouse et al., 1993; Vertes et al., 2010).
Noradrenergic afferents originate from the locus coeruleus, while the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus provides
cholinergic input to the DLG (Papadopoulos and Parnavelas, 1990; Waterhouse et al., 1993; Billet et al., 1999).
The output of the DLG is mainly directed to the primary visual cortex (area 17), terminating in layer 4,
whereas there are lesser inputs to layers 1 and 6 (Ribak
and Peters, 1975; Jones, 1985, 2007). The peristriate area
18 also receives a weak projection from DLG (Sanderson et al., 1991). The geniculocortical pathway uses glutamate as its neurotransmitter (Kharazia and Weinberg,
1994; Saez et al., 1998).

341

comparable to those of the intergeniculate leaflet (see
below). Thus, the medial, parvicellular part of the VLG
projects to the parafascicular and lateral dorsal thalamic nuclei as well as to the reuniens (RE) and rhomboid nuclei (RH) of the midline thalamus (McKenna
and Vertes, 2004). The lateral, magnocellular VLG sends
fibers to the dorsal lateral geniculate and lateral posterior
thalamic nuclei (Kolmac et al., 2000; Moore et al., 2000).
Hypothalamic projections from the VLG reach the lateral
and posterior hypothalamus and the perifornical area.
The ventral lateral geniculate nucleus further distributes
to the zona incerta, pretectal nuclei, deep and intermediate layers of the superior colliculus, dorsal and medial
terminal nuclei of the accessory optic system, PAG, the
peripeduncular region, and the accessory inferior olive
(Moore et al., 2000; Born and Schmidt, 2008).

Intergeniculate Leaflet

The VLG, like the reticular thalamic nucleus, is
embryologically derived from the prethalamus (or ventral thalamus). Cytoarchitectonically, the VLG can be
subdivided into a lateral, magnocellular part (VLGmc)
and a somewhat smaller, medial parvicellular part
(VLGpc). The two divisions are separated by a fiber-rich,
cell-free zone (Jones, 1985, 2007). Neurons in the magnocellular part contain parvalbumin, nitric oxide synthase
and enkephalin; those in the parvicellular part contain
substance P and calretinin (Hermanson et al., 1995; Harrington, 1997; Meng et al., 1998; Jones, 2007).

The IGL is a distinct, dorsoventrally narrow region
lying between the dorsal and ventral lateral geniculate
nuclei and extends virtually over the entire rostrocaudal length of the lateral geniculate complex (Hickey
and Spear, 1976; Moore and Card, 1994). Like the ventral lateral geniculate nucleus, it is a derivative of the
pre- (or ventral) thalamus. The borders of IGL can be
readily identified by staining for glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP) or peptides like neuropeptide Y (NPY),
substance P, and enkephalin, as well as the neurokinin-1
receptor. The IGL contains several types of small- to
medium-sized neurons most of which have their dendritic arborizations within the nucleus (Moore and Card,
1994; Piggins et al., 2001).

Afferent and Efferent Projections
Afferents to the ventral lateral geniculate nucleus
show a clear segregation between the medial VLGpc
and the lateral VLGmc. The VLGpc receives extensive
inputs from the brainstem, in particular from the reticular formation, the deep layers of the superior colliculus,
the periaqueductal gray (PAG), parabrachial regions,
the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus, the locus coeruleus,
the substantia nigra-pars reticulata and deep cerebellar
nuclei (Vaudano and Legg, 1992; Kolmac and Mitrofanis, 2000). The VLGmc receives strong projections
mainly from the retina and layer 5 of the visual cortex
(Hickey and Spear, 1976; Takahashi, 1985; Bourassa
and Deschênes, 1995) but relatively few fibers from the
brainstem (Kolmac and Mitrofanis, 2000). Immunohistochemical analysis has revealed a rich aggregate of serotonergic fibers in VLGmc, which are present, but not as
dense, in the VLGpc (Vertes et al., 2010).
Unlike the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus, there are
no projections from the VLG to the cortex. Instead, the
VLG has rather extensive projections to the thalamus,

Afferent and Efferent Projections
The main sources of input to the intergeniculate leaflet are the retina and the contralateral IGL. Glutamatergic retinal fibers terminate as RL-type terminals and may
be considered driving afferents to the IGL (Mikkelsen,
1992; Moore and Card, 1994). The neurons that give
rise to the commissural connections contain enkephalin
(Card and Moore, 1989). Further inputs to the IGL originate from the suprachiasmatic nucleus, posterior hypothalamic area, superior colliculus, and several brainstem
nuclei, including the locus coeruleus, raphe nuclei, and
the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus (Moore et al., 2000;
Vertes et al., 2010). Orexinergic afferents from the hypothalamus make synaptic contacts with NPY containing
IGL neurons (Nixon and Smale, 2005; Pekala et al., 2011).
There is a dense substance P-immunoreactive plexus in
the intergeniculate leaflet (Piggins et al., 2001).
The geniculo-hypothalamic tract represents the primary output of IGL and targets the suprachiasmatic
nucleus and anterior hypothalamic regions. Neurons of
IGL projecting to the suprachiasmatic nucleus contain

Ventral Lateral Geniculate Nucleus

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

342

16. THALAMUS

NPY (Card and Moore, 1989; Harrington, 1997; Morin,
2012). The IGL also distributes to the subcommissural
organ and the pineal gland (Mikkelsen, 1994). Additional
outputs include those to the midline thalamic nuclei, in
particular, to the paraventricular, reuniens and rhomboid nuclei, as well as to the dorsal and lateral hypothalamus and zona incerta (Moore et al., 2000; McKenna and
Vertes, 2004). Brainstem targets are superficial layers of
the superior colliculus, periaqueductal grey, and accessory optic nuclei (Moore et al., 2000).

Functional Aspects of the Lateral Geniculate
Complex
The DLG is the main thalamic gateway for the transfer of visual information from the retina to the cerebral
cortex. The nucleus rather faithfully maps the external
visual field onto the primary visual cortex (area 17, V1).
The functional aspects of the DLG have been the subject of a vast body of literature and have recently been
elegantly reviewed by others (e.g., Sherman and Guillery, 2001, 2006).
The functions of the VLG are less well-established.
In view of its origin from the prethalamus, and some of
its interconnections (rather extensive projections to the
thalamus), the functions of the VLG might, in part, be
compared with those of the reticular thalamic nucleus.
However, the functional aspects of the VLG are probably much more diverse. Based on distinct differences in
afferent and efferent projections, the medial and lateral
parts of VLG (VLGpc and VLGmc, respectively) most
likely have different, but related, functions. Whereas the
VLGmc is more directly associated with the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus and visual cortices, the VLGpc is
closely linked with the hypothalamus, particularly the
suprachiasmatic nucleus, and as such, may share functions with the IGL. The interconnections among VLG,
SC, and pretectal nuclei may be involved in the control
of visuomotor responses, whereas those with the hypothalamus may affect circadian rhythms (Harrington,
1997; Jones, 2007). The functional aspects of IGL have
been studied in somewhat more detail. The retinal input
to the IGL originates from a set of retinal ganglion cells
that convey luminance information (Moore et al., 1995).
Subpopulations of IGL neurons projecting to either the
suprachiasmatic nucleus or contralateral IGL show different firing characteristics in response to light and dark
cycles (Błasiak and Lewandowski, 2013). Furthermore,
the strong reciprocal connections of IGL with the suprachiasmatic nucleus as well as links with the dorsal raphe,
lateral/posterior hypothalamus, and pineal gland fit well
with a critical role for the IGL in circadian timing functions (Moore and Card, 1994; Harrington, 1997; Błasiak
et al., 2006; Pekala et al., 2011; Błasiak and Lewandowski,
2013). While IGL projections to the suprachiasmatic

nucleus provide an indirect means to influence autonomic and neuroendocrine circadian rhythms, IGL also
directly connects with neuroendocrine cells in other
parts of the hypothalamus (Horvath, 1998). The interconnections of IGL with the VLG, hypothalamus, and
midline thalamic nuclei, including the paraventricular
nucleus (PV), may contribute to their involvement in the
circadian entrainment of food and energy regulation (for
review, see Kelley et al., 2005).

VENTRAL POSTERIOR COMPLEX
The ventral posterior complex (VP) of rats occupies
an extensive area of the ventrolateral thalamus, positioned rostromedial to the medial geniculate complex
and extending to the rostral third of the thalamus. The
VP is bordered ventrally and laterally by the medial
lemniscus and the reticular thalamic (RT) nucleus and
dorsomedially by the posterior complex (PO) of the thalamus. Rostrally, PO is gradually replaced by the ventral
lateral nucleus, located medial to VP. The ventral posterior complex is the main relay for various types of sensory information reaching the cortex and can be divided
into three main parts: the ventral posterolateral nucleus
(VPL) receiving somatosensory inputs from the spinal
cord, the ventral posteromedial nucleus (VPM) receiving
somatosensory inputs from the trigeminal system, and
a small celled (or parvicellular) region medial to VPM/
VPL, designated VPpc, which is the main thalamic relay
for gustatory and visceral afferents.
The VPL and VPM are distinguishable not only by
their connectivity but also on the basis of cyto- and
chemoarchitectonics. In Nissl-stained material (Paxinos and Watson, 2014), VPM stands out by containing
more densely packed cells than either VPL or PO, but
VPM exhibits low levels of acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
activity compared to moderate levels for VPL and the
posterior complex. Most neurons in VPM and VPL are
medium-sized thalamocortically projecting cells. In contrast to other species, there are reportedly no GABAergic
neurons in the VP complex of rats (Harris and Hendrickson, 1987; Price, 1995; Sherman and Guillery, 2006). The
neurons of VPL are arranged in rostrocaudal and dorsoventral rows that are roughly parallel to the external
medullary lamina; the rows curve partially around the
rostral pole of VPM (McAllister and Wells, 1981).
The VPM is largely organized into what are termed
barreloids, first described in mice and later identified in
rats (Van der Loos, 1976; Diamond et al., 2008). Barreloids are aggregates or groupings of cells that represent
individual whiskers at the level of the thalamus and can
best be visualized using mitochondrial markers such as
cytochrome oxidase (Land and Simons, 1985; Haidarliu
and Ahissar, 2001; Diamond et al., 2008; Bosman et al.,

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Ventral Posterior Complex

2011). These microstructures are most apparent in young
rats, but can also be demonstrated in adults. Whereas the
barreloids of VPM convey information from single whiskers, the dendrites of neurons of barreloids may cross
boundaries into neighboring barreloids thereby providing a neural substrate for cross-talk between barreloids
(Desilets-Roy et al., 2002). From the whiskers, information is first transmitted to barrelettes of the trigeminal
nucleus, then to the barreloids of VPM, and finally to the
barrels of the somatosensory cortex (S1). There is virtually a one-to-one relationship from individual whiskers
to corresponding cortical barrels. Accordingly, the projections from the barreloids of VPM to the barrel cortex
are strictly topographically organized (Lu and Lin, 1993;
Land et al., 1995). Thalamocortical axons from VPL/
VPM terminate predominantly in layer 4 of the primary
sensory cortex (S1) and use glutamate as a neurotransmitter (Kharazia and Weinberg, 1994). Apart from the
main terminations in layer 4, VPM axons also branch
to layers 1 and 5/6 of S1 (Lu and Lin, 1993; Zhang and
Deschênes, 1998).

Afferent and Efferent Projections
The ventral posterolateral and ventral posteromedial nuclei receive main somatosensory inputs from the
dorsal lamina of the spinal cord, dorsal column nuclei,
and the trigeminal complex (Gauriau and Bernard, 2004;
Tracey, 2004; Waite, 2004; see also Somatosensory System,
Chapter 24).
Somatosensory projections are topographically organized such that afferents from the trunk and limbs terminate in VPL; those from the head terminate in VPM.
Spinal and trigeminal fibers not only target VPL and
VPM but also distribute to other thalamic nuclei including the posterior nucleus (see below), intralaminar
nuclei and the submedial nucleus (SMT) of thalamus.
Spinothalamic fibers conveying nociceptive signals to
the thalamus originate from a relatively wide-ranging
region of the spinal cord, most heavily from lamina 1 of
the dorsal horn, and terminate as large boutons in VPL
(McAllister and Wells, 1981; Burstein et al., 1990; Dado
et al., 1994; Katter et al., 1996; Kobayashi, 1998; Willis
et al., 2004). Nociceptive information also reaches VPL
indirectly via several routes including from the caudal
medullary reticular formation (Villanueva et al., 1998).
Afferents from the dorsal column nuclei to VPL also
terminate as large boutons (McAllister and Wells, 1981;
Villanueva et al., 1998). VPL is reportedly divided into
rostral, intermediate, and caudal zones, which are distinct, essentially non-overlapping, regions processing
different types of modality specific information (Francis
et al., 2008). The rostral VPL mainly receives proprioceptive input, the intermediate VPL receives cutaneous
afferents, and the caudal VPL processes nociceptive and

343

visceral input. The receptive fields of the rostral and
caudal VPL are broad, while those of the intermediate
VPL (processing cutaneous information) are restricted
and finely somatotopically organized with the forelimbs represented medially and the hindlimbs laterally
(Francis et al., 2008). Lemniscal, but also spinothalamic,
fibers use glutamate as the neurotransmitter (De Biasi
et al., 1994). Spinothalamic fibers have also been shown
to contain substance P (Battaglia et al., 1992; Nishiyama
et al., 1995).
The spinal (SpV) and principal (PrV) nuclei of the
trigeminal complex project to VPM and also to the
medial part of the posterior nucleus (POm). The whisker-responsive regions of the SpV and PrV give rise
to three (or possibly four) trigemino-thalamocortical
pathways involved in the transfer information from the
brainstem through the thalamus to the “barrels” of the
barrel cortex—as well as to intervening septa between
the barrels (Fig. 1) (Kim and Ebner, 1999; Pierret et al.,
2000; Urbain and Deschênes, 2007; Kichula and Huntley, 2008; Haidarliu et al., 2008; Furuta et al., 2009). The
three major pathways are the lemniscal, the extralemniscal and the paralemniscal systems. The lemniscal
system codes single whisker activity, with the other
two essentially responsible for multi-whisker information. The lemniscal system originates from clusters of
small neurons (barrelettes) of the PrV, which distribute
densely to “core compartments” of single barreloids of
the dorsomedial two-thirds of VPM (VPMdm) and from
there to single barrels of S1. The extralemniscal system
arises from inter-barrellete cells of the caudal part of
the spinal interpolar trigeminal nucleus (SpV) which
project to the ventrolateral sector of VPM (VPMvl) (or
the “tail” of the barreloids), and then to the secondary
somatosensory cortex (S2) and to the septa of S1. The
paralemniscal system originates from the rostral part
of the interpolar SpV which targets cells of the medial
sector of the posterior nucleus (POm), and they, in turn,
distribute to the septa and to all layers of the barrel cortex with a concentration in layers 1 and 5a (Petreanu
et al., 2009; Meyer et al., 2010; Wimmer et al., 2010).
The POm input to the barrel cortex is substantial with
90-580 terminal boutons per neuron (Meyer et al., 2010;
Wimmer et al., 2010).
In addition, a fourth ascending pathway for the
vibrissa has been identified that originates from the
dorsal part (or “head’) of the barreloids and primarily
distributes to the septa of the barrel cortex (Urbain and
Deschênes, 2007). In contrast to the prevailing view that
thalamic afferents to the septa essentially derive from
the paralemniscal system (or POm) (Lu and Lin, 1993),
Furuta et al. (2009) suggested that they originate from
the head of the barreloids—and thus input to the septa,
like that to the barrels, mainly arises from the lemniscal
system.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

344

16. THALAMUS

$)URP:KLVNHUWR&RUWH[

%:KLVNHUVDQG%DUUHOV
$ $ $
% % %


& & &



' ' '



&7KDODPRFRUWLFDOFRQQHFWLYLW\

( ( (

'&RUWLFRFRUWLFDOFRQQHFWLYLW\

/
/

6

/
/$

0

/%

6

/
930 320

6

FIGURE 1  Synaptic pathways for processing whisker-related information in the barrel cortex of the rat. (A) Deflection of the whiskers evokes
action potentials in sensory neurons of the trigeminal nerve, which release glutamate at a first synapse in the brainstem (1). Brainstem neurons
send sensory information to the ventral posteromedial (VPM) and posterior (PO) nuclei of the thalamus (2), where a second glutamatergic synapse
excites thalamocortical neurons projecting to the primary somatosensory barrel cortex (3). (B) The layout of whisker follicles (row C whiskers
shown, left) on the snout of the rat with corresponding anatomical structures termed “barrels” in layer 4 of the primary somatosensory neocortex
(right) which are arranged in a near identical pattern to that of the whiskers. The standard nomenclature for both whiskers and barrels consists
of the rows A–E and the arcs 1, 2, 3, etc. The C2 whisker follicle and the C2 barrel are highlighted in yellow. (C) There are at least two parallel
thalamocortical pathways for signaling whisker-related sensory information to the barrel cortex. Neurons in the VPM (red, left) are glutamatergic
and signal information relating primarily to deflections of a single whisker. The axons of VPM neurons terminate predominantly in individual
layer 4 barrels, with an additional innervation of layer 6 (right). Corticothalamic layer 6 neurons provide reciprocal feedback to the VPM (not
shown). Neurons of the medial part of the posterior nucleus (POM) of the thalamus (labeled green, left) have broader receptive fields and axons
which largely avoid the layer 4 barrels and primarily target layers 1 and 5A of the barrel cortex (right). Corticothalamic neurons in layer 5 provide
a strong input to the POM (not shown). (D) Neurons in the barrel cortex are reciprocally connected to other cortical areas through long-range glutamatergic corticocortical synapses. Important pathways connect the primary somatosensory (S1) barrel cortex with the secondary somatosensory
cortex (S2) and the primary motor cortex (M1) of the same hemisphere. Callosal projections are also present but less prominent. From Petersen,
C.C.H. (2007). The functional organization of the barrel cortex. Neuron 56, 339–355.

The three major thalamocortical pathways (paralemniscal, extralemniscal, lemniscal) serve different functional
roles in the transfer of information from the whiskers to
the somatosensory cortex (Williams et al., 1994; Veinante
and Deschênes, 1999; Pierret et al., 2000; Ahissar et al.,
2000; Yu et al., 2006). For instance, recordings from the
three systems (POm/paralemniscal, VPMvl/extralemniscal, VPMdm/lemniscal) have shown that POm neurons encode whisker movements (whisking), VPMvl cells
respond to contact (touch) information, and VPMdm cells
respond to both contact and whisking (Yu et al., 2006). Signals conveyed by the parallel systems are integrated at
the barrel cortex for the detection, localization and identification of objects by the vibrissa (Ahissar and Arieli,
2001; Yu et al., 2006; Alloway, 2008; Bosman et al., 2011).
With respect to the barrel cortex, thalamic afferents
appear to fairly selectively target either the septa or the
barrels of the barrel cortex—indicating independent

streams of processing from the thalamus to the barrel
cortex (Shepherd and Svoboda, 2005; Alloway, 2008;
Bokor et al., 2008). Specifically, with some overlap, the
extralemniscal and paralemniscal systems, responsive to
multiple whiskers, distribute to the septa, whereas the
lemniscal system, receptive to single whiskers, projects
to the barrels of the barrel cortex (Derdikmann et al.,
2006; Yu et al., 2006; Bokor et al., 2008). This has led to
the view that the septa mainly encode the kinetics of
the whisker movements (e.g., frequency, amplitude),
while the barrels process spatiotemporal information for
object identification (Yu et al., 2006). This is supported,
in part, by the demonstration that the septa distribute
to the motor cortex and to the contralateral septa (S1),
thus possibly serving to coordinate bilateral whisker
movements (Hayama and Ogawa, 1997; Chakrabarti
et al., 2008; Alloway et al., 2004). The full range of vibrissal functions, however, requires an integration of the two

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

345

Posterior Nucleus

systems (septa and barrel) that is accomplished at several levels of the brain (Bosman et al., 2011).
The VPL and VPM also receive afferents from other
subcortical regions, among them a serotonergic input
from the dorsal raphe nucleus, and GABAergic afferents
from the RT of thalamus (Vertes, 1991; Cox et al., 1996;
Kirifides et al., 2001). Some RT fibers distribute to VP as
clusters while others have a wide and more diffuse pattern of termination. This indicates that inhibitory inputs
from RT serve different roles in the ventrobasal complex
(Cox et al., 1996).
Corticothalamic projections to VPL and VPM are
organized in a complex manner and generally reflect the
hypothesized way in which afferents to the thalamus are
organized as drivers and modulators (see Some General
Aspects of Thalamic Organization above). Corticothalamic
projections originating from pyramidal cells of the upper
part of layer 6 (layer 6a) of the barrel cortex terminate
exclusively in VPM where they arborize in long rostrocaudally oriented bands or “rods.” A “rod” originating
from a single barrel in the cortex can make contact with
a series of barreloids that together represent an arc (column) of whiskers (Hoogland et al., 1987; Bourassa et al.,
1995). Neurons in the deeper parts of layer 6 (layer 6b)
of the barrel cortex primarily project to POm but also
collateralize to VPM where they form rods (Bourassa
et al., 1995). Neurons in layer 6a of the interbarrel (septa)
regions distribute to both VPM and POm, whereas those
of layer 6b of septa terminate exclusively in POm (Wright
et al., 2000; Killackey and Sherman, 2003). All corticothalamic fibers originating in layer 6 send collaterals to the
RT and possess long branches with numerous en passant
boutons (Bourassa et al., 1995; Levesque et al., 1996; Wright
et al., 2000). Fibers originating in layer 5 of the barrel field
distribute to POm but not to VPM—or to RT (Veinante
et al., 2000b; Killackey and Sherman, 2003). Layer 5 fibers
terminate in clusters with large boutons in the posterior
thalamic nucleus (Hoogland et al., 1991; Bourassa et al.,
1995; Veinante et al., 2000b). Interestingly, based on layer
5 barrel projections to POm, and return POm projections
to septa of the barrel cortex (see above), Killackey and
Sherman (2003) proposed that layer 5 “driving” inputs to
POm would designate POm as a higher order thalamic
nucleus and consequently its cortical target (septa of S1)
as a higher order cortical area. Thus, as they state, S1 may
represent a cortical mosaic; that is, “a true primary cortex
(barrel cortex) and a higher order area (non-barrel cortex)” (Killackey and Sherman, 2003, p. 7383).

Functional Aspects
VPL and VPM are the primary thalamic relays for
somatic sensation; that is, nociceptive and tactile/proprioceptive information from the body and head, respectively. In the rat, the barreloid region representing the

whisker field occupies a large part of VPM, signifying the
importance of the rodent whisker system for navigation
and exploration. In part, this is an active process in which
the whiskers are moved in exploratory activities. As
described, the paralemniscal system plays a direct role in
“whisking,” whereas the lemniscal system conveys contact (touch) information (Pierret et al., 2000; Yu et al., 2006;
Diamond et al., 2008; Bosman et al., 2011). For the whisker
system to function as an integrated network, signals from
different whiskers need to be integrated at several levels
along the pathway from the periphery to the barrel cortex, and in particular, in VPM. This is indicated by the
complex relationships that exist between the VPM and
the barrel cortex, as well as by the actions of the reticular
nucleus. For example, while as indicated, individual barreloids project to single cortical barrels, return projections
from the cortex take the form of rods in VPM, “interconnecting” barreloids representing several or all whiskers
in an arc (Hoogland et al., 1987; Bourassa et al., 1995). Further, the output from a row of cortical barrels converges
onto common termination sites in the RT (Welker et al.,
1988), and RT sends at least two types of fibers having
distinct terminal patterns to VPM which play a significant and differential role in the modulation of information at the level of the VPM (Cox et al., 1996). Reticular
projections to the barreloids are whisker-specific; that is,
they target the barreloids of the (principal) whisker to
which they are responsive (Desilets-Roy et al., 2002).
Since there is extensive literature on electrophysiological and functional aspects of the thalamic relay of
somatosensory information in relation to the whisker
system, further elaboration on this subject is beyond the
scope of this chapter. For a more comprehensive treatment of this subject, the reader is referred to several
recent reviews: Petersen (2007), Alloway (2008), Diamond et al. (2008), Bosman et al. (2011) and Kleinfeld and
Deschênes (2011).

POSTERIOR NUCLEUS
The posterior nucleus of thalamus (PO, or the posterior complex) is situated in the caudal part of the thalamus, bordered caudally by the pretectal nuclei. In its
caudal aspect, PO is located medial to the medial geniculate nucleus; more rostrally this position is taken by the
ventral posterior complex, particularly the ventral posteromedial nucleus. Dorsally, PO is mainly bordered by
the lateral posterior nucleus and medially by the intralaminar nuclei. The posterior nucleus in rats is a heterogeneous area, particularly its caudal aspects. Within
the region generally considered to include PO, several
subnuclei have been identified on the basis of different
staining patterns such as the ethmoid, scaphoid, and retroethmoid nuclei (Paxinos et al., 1999). The PO appears

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

346

16. THALAMUS

as a relatively cell-sparse area in Nissl-stained sections,
standing out against the cell-dense ventral posteromedial nucleus, medially.

Afferent and Efferent Projections
PO consists of three main divisions: the lateral, intermediate, and medial divisions (Jones, 2007). The medial
division (or POm), or whisker-related area, occupies a
considerable portion of PO in rodents. Like the ventral
posterior complex, PO receives significant input from
the spinal cord and from the brainstem trigeminal complex (Cliffer et al., 1991; Chiaia et al., 1991a, 1991b; see also
Somatosensory System, Chapter 24). However, most ascending projections from these systems are less dense and terminate in a more diffuse way in PO than in the adjacent
ventral posterior nuclei (Chiaia et al., 1991a; Villanueva
et al., 1998). Moreover, projections to PO from the spinothalamic tract and spinal trigeminal nucleus are more
pronounced than those from the dorsal column nuclei or
principal trigeminal nucleus (McAllister and Wells, 1981;
Chiaia et al., 1991a). As discussed, POm is part of the paralemniscal system; that is, one of three trigemino-thalamocortical pathways relaying vibrissal information from the
periphery to the barrel cortex (Diamond et al., 2008). POm
receives afferents from the spinal trigeminal nucleus and
projects to the septa as well as to layers 1 and 5a of the
barrel cortex (Fig. 1) (Petersen, 2007; Petreanu et al., 2009;
Meyer et al., 2010; Wimmer et al., 2010).
Cortical projections to PO primarily arise from
somatosensory areas S1 and S2, but additionally from
the motor, premotor (frontal eye field) and insular cortices (Veinante et al., 2000b; Guandalini, 2001). While S1
predominantly projects to dorsal parts of the posterior
complex and S2 to more ventral and medial parts, there
are substantial areas of overlap (Shi and Cassell, 1998b;
Veinante et al., 2000b). The corticothalamic S1 projections to POm predominantly originate from pyramidal
layer 5 and layer 6 neurons; those of layer 5 are collaterals of axons distributing to the striatum and brainstem
(Levesque et al., 1996; Veinante et al., 2000b; Killackey
and Sherman, 2003). Layer 5 (or 5b) fibers to POm originate from both the barrels and septa of S1 and terminate
on proximal dendrites of POm cells as large RL-type
endings, thus considered “drivers” to POm cells (Sherman and Guillery, 2006). As discussed with respect to
VP, this would designate POm as a “higher order” thalamic nucleus, or one that links primary with associational (or higher order) areas of the cortex (Killackey and
Sherman, 2003; Sherman and Guillery, 2006).

Functional Aspects
While it is clear that PO receives inputs from various
sensory modalities (somatosensory, auditory, visual, and

vestibular) which likely converge onto some PO n
­ eurons,
PO is dominated by the somatosensory modality. POm
receives whisker-related information from the trigeminal complex and “driving” input from layer 5 cells of
S1, and thus might be considered both a first and higher
order thalamic nucleus (Sherman and Guillery, 2006).
This, however, may be the case for most thalamic nuclei
(see Some General Aspects of Thalamic Organization above).
The functional roles for POm have centered on its
involvement in whisker behavior. As indicated, the whisker system not only provides information about passive
movements of individual or groups of whiskers, but
controls the active movements of whiskers (whisking) as
an essential parts of exploratory behavior. POm appears
to be intimately involved in “whisking,” most likely its
primary function in the whisker system. Specifically,
POm cells respond to multiple whiskers (Veinante et al.,
2000a; Brecht and Sakmann, 2002; Yu et al. 2006; Bokor
et al., 2008), and as such would be poor candidates for
discriminating spatiotemporal properties of individual
whiskers, but would be well suited to track the synchronous movements of multiple whiskers—or whisking. In
this regard, POm cells are reportedly strongly activated
during free air whisking but unresponsive to vibrissal
contact with external objects (Yu et al., 2006). In addition, POm primarily targets the septa of the barrel cortex (Lu and Lin, 1993; Pierret et al., 2000), and the septa
(and associated structures) form part of a separate circuit within the barrel cortex responsible for encoding the
kinetics of whisker movements (Kim and Ebner, 1999;
Alloway, 2008). Finally, descending layer 5 corticothalamic S1 projections to POm (drivers) appear to provide
feedback control over self-initiated whisker movements,
possibly to fine tune these movements.

VENTRAL POSTERIOR PARVICELLULAR
REGION
Gustatory and Visceral Nuclei
The ventromedial part of the ventral posterior complex is the relay for gustatory and visceral information
from the periphery to the insular cortex (Norgren and
Leonard, 1973; Cechetto and Saper, 1987; Lundy and
Norgren, 2004). The medial part of VP appears to contain
neurons that are smaller than those of other parts of VP,
and has hence been designated the parvicellular ventral
posterior nucleus (VPpc). There is some suggestion, however, that cells of this region are not smaller than other
VP neurons but rather are more dispersed than those of
the principal VP (Halsell, 1992). VPpc is bordered ventrolaterally by the medial lemniscus and extends medially
just ventral to the parafascicular nucleus of thalamus,
and more rostrally, ventral to the paracentral and central

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Medial Geniculate Nucleus

medial nuclei. The VPpc is r­ostrally “replaced” by the
ventromedial nucleus. The VPpc is a rather thin sheet
of neurons and is generally divided into medial and lateral parts; that is, parvicellular parts of the VPM and
VPL nuclei (Cechetto and Saper, 1987; Shi and Cassell,
1998a). The medial part of VPpc (or VPMpc) relays gustatory information (Cechetto and Saper, 1987; Lundy
and Norgren, 2004) from the parabrachial complex to
the gustatory cortex and hence constitutes the “gustatory thalamus” (Shi and Cassell, 1998a; Lundy and Norgren, 2004; Carleton et al., 2010; Samuelson et al., 2013).
All sensory modalities for the oral cavity are represented
in VPMpc (Carleton et al., 2010).
Afferent and Efferent Projections
The major input to VPpc is derived from the parabrachial nucleus (Norgren and Leonard, 1973; Cechetto and
Saper, 1987; Bester et al., 1999; Krout and Loewy, 2000a;
Lundy and Norgren, 2004). Other brainstem afferents to
VPpc arise from specific parts of the spinal and principal trigeminal nuclei, as well as from the laterodorsal
tegmental nucleus, locus coeruleus, solitary nucleus,
A5 region, and the cuneate nucleus (Krout et al., 2002).
Subcortically, VPpc projects to the lateral and central
nuclei of the amygdala, to the amygdalostriatal transition zone (dorsal to the central amygdaloid nucleus) and
rostrally to ventral parts of the caudate-putamen. VPpc
projections to cortex are primarily directed to granular and dysgranular areas of the posterior and parietal
insular cortices; the anterior insular cortex receives
only minor projections from VPpc (Kosar et al., 1986b;
Cechetto and Saper, 1987; Turner and Herkenham, 1991;
Nakashima et al., 2000). Projections from lateral parts of
VPpc terminate more dorsally than those of the medial
VPpc (or VPMpc) in the dysgranular insular (DI) cortex
(Nakashima et al., 2000). VPMpc fibers are mainly localized to caudal levels of DI, adjacent to the rhinal sulcus.
VPMpc cells projecting to the insular cortex are separate
from those projecting to the amygdala (Nakashima et al.,
2000). Cortical afferents to the VPpc primarily originate
from the insular cortical areas to which it projects. The
posterior granular and DI cortices mainly distribute
to the medial VPpc, whereas the parietal insular cortex projects to the lateral part of VPpc (Shi and Cassell,
1998a, 1998b). The agranular insular cortices send few
projections to VPpc (Shi and Cassell, 1998a).
Functional Aspects
The VPpc primarily serves to transfer gustatory and
visceral information to the granular and dysgranular
insular cortices. The insular cortices are situated between
the olfactory cortex, ventrally, and the primary and secondary somatosensory cortices, dorsally. Combined anatomical and physiological studies have demonstrated
that the gustatory area of the insular cortex is located

347

mid-rostrocaudally along the length of the insular cortex,
between the dorsal/ventral agranular insular cortices,
rostrally, and the parietal insular cortices, caudally (Shi
and Cassell, 1998a, 1998b). The VMPpc contains a heterogeneous population of cells responding to single or
to multiple modalities of sensory stimuli. For example, a
sampling of 115 cells of VMPpc showed that 23% of them
responded to only one stimulus (unimodal neurons)
such as touch, temperature or gustatory stimulation of
the oral cavity, whereas 41% of cells responded to various combinations of these three modalities (Verhagen
et al., 2003). Regarding gustation, 9% of cells responded
solely to gustatory stimuli, 33% to gustatory/touch and
another 6% to all three modalities. In effect, then, about
half of the population of VPMpc neurons responded to
gustatory stimulation. It was further shown that inactivation of VPMpc with muscimol disrupted the tasteresponsive activity of 66% of cells of the gustatory cortex
(Samuelson et al., 2013). Whereas there does not seem to
be a topographical ordering of cell types in the VPMpc,
those of the gustatory cortex observe a fairly strict dorsoventral topographic organization. Specifically, touch and
temperature of the oral cavity are represented dorsally in
the granular insular cortex, whereas taste is represented
ventrally in the DI cortex and to a lesser extent in the
agranular insular cortex (Kosar et al., 1986a; Yamamoto
et al., 1988; Katz et al., 2001). (For a more comprehensive
review of the rat gustatory system including the role of
the thalamus, see Gustatory System, Chapter 26.)

MEDIAL GENICULATE NUCLEUS
The medial geniculate nucleus (MG) forms the caudal
extension of the thalamus and extends into the mesencephalon. The rostral part of MG is located ventromedial
to the lateral geniculate complex. The MG is the principal auditory relay nucleus of the thalamus and consists of several subnuclei which have different functions
within the auditory system. The MG can be divided into
medial (MGm), ventral (MGv) and dorsal (MGd) divisions (Jones, 1985, 2007; Clerici and Coleman, 1990).
The “auditory” thalamus further consists of a number
of smaller nuclei that are positioned medial and ventromedial to the MG complex; that is, the suprageniculate
nucleus (SG), the posterior limitans thalamic nucleus
(PLi), the posterior intralaminar thalamic nucleus (PIL)
and the lateral part of the parvicellular subparafascicular
nucleus (SPF). A marginal zone (MGmz) “covers” dorsal, lateral, and ventral aspects of the MGd and MGv.
(For an in-depth overview of the auditory thalamus, see
Auditory System, Chapter 29.)
The MGd and MGv are separated by a midgeniculate bundle which is mainly derived from the inferior
colliculus (IC). The MGv can be further divided into a

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

348

16. THALAMUS

ventral and an ovoid part based on fiber architectonics
and cytoarchitectonics (Clerici and Coleman, 1990). The
main cell type in MGv is small to medium-sized and has
bushy tufted dendrites forming fibrodendritic laminae
that are oriented with respect to fiber bundles from the
IC in a dorsolateral to ventromedial direction (Winer
et al., 1999a). In the oval part of the MGv, the orientation of cells and collicular afferents is more spiral-like
(Clerici and Coleman, 1990). The MGd is rather heterogeneous in neuronal composition and can be subdivided
into several subnuclei. Neurons of the MGd have radiating, “tufty” dendrites (Winer et al., 1999a). The neuronal
population of MGm is also heterogeneous, consisting
of small to magnocellular neurons. Few interneurons
(about 1%) have been identified in the MG complex,
most of which are GABAergic (Winer and Larue, 1988;
Winer et al., 1999a).

Afferent and Efferent Projections
Ascending fibers to MG primarily originate from the
IC. While the MGv is mainly targeted by the central
nucleus of the IC, the MG complex as a whole receives
fibers from the cortex of the IC. The MGm also receives
input from the central nucleus of IC (Jones, 1985, 2007;
LeDoux et al., 1987). The central nucleus of the IC is
strictly tonotopically organized, and the MGv transfers
this highly organized information to the primary auditory cortex (AUD) of the temporal lobe (Winer et al.,
1999b). As such, the MGv, in particular the ovoid subnucleus, forms the main thalamic relay for the auditory
area.
IC terminals in MG are variable in size and include
small and large profiles, the larger ones being predominant in the MGv (Bartlett et al., 2000). This heterogeneity
in the morphology of the ascending colliculo-geniculate
projections indicates a greater complexity in auditory
pathways than those of other sensory thalamic nuclei.
Furthermore, part of the collicular afferents to MGv
and MGd appear to be inhibitory (Bartlett and Smith,
1999). Yet, the general organization of ascending driving inputs and descending modulatory cortical fibers
seems also to apply to MGv. While MGv and MGd are
devoid of return projections to IC, the inferior colliculus
receives input from the MGm, the SG, the PIL and the
subparafascicular nucleus (SPF) of the medial geniculate complex (Senatorov and Hu, 2002; Winer et al.,
2002).
The MG, as well as the SG and PIL, not only receives
auditory information from the IC but is also contacted
by fibers from the superior colliculus (Linke, 1999). In
addition, the MGm receives direct projections from
the dorsal cochlear nucleus, bypassing the IC. In view
of the fact that the superior colliculus and the dorsal
cochlear nucleus receive multimodal information, the

medially located subnuclei of MG likely process more
than ­auditory information (Malmierca et al., 2002).
Corticothalamic fibers from the primary auditory
(AUD) cortex and from secondary auditory areas (or
auditory belt cortex), Te2 and Te3, terminate in different
parts of the medial geniculate complex. AUD distributes
to MGv in a topographical and tonotopic manner. The
rostral AUD, which contains neurons that respond to
high frequencies, sends projections to the ventral MGv,
whereas AUD neurons with lower frequency characteristics, located more caudally in AUD, innervate the dorsal
MGv (Shi and Cassell, 1997; Hazama et al., 2004; Kimura
et al., 2005). AUD fibers also distribute to the auditory
divisions of the thalamic reticular nucleus (Hazama et al.,
2004; Kimura et al., 2005, 2012). Projections from AUD to
MGd are modest and target its ventral aspect (Shi and
Cassell, 1997; Hazama et al., 2004; Kimura et al., 2005).
The auditory belt cortex distributes most densely to
MGd. The posterodorsal division of Te2 targets the rostral portion of MGd and the SG (Kimura et al., 2004). Area
Te3 projects densely to the dorsal part of MGd, directly
adjacent to the lateral posterior thalamic nucleus which
receives pronounced input from Te2 (Shi and Cassell,
1997, Kimura et al., 2004). At the ultrastructural level,
corticothalamic projections arising from the primary
auditory cortex terminate as small and large (“giant”)
terminals in the MG complex. The smaller, most numerous corticothalamic terminals are present throughout
the MG, the larger terminals are mainly found in the
ventral part of MGd (Rouiller and Welker, 1991) and
dorsal aspects of the marginal division (MGmz) (Bartlett
et al., 2000).
The output of MG is primarily directed to the primary and secondary auditory regions of cortex, with
additional projections to adjacent areas of the temporal lobe, the basal ganglia and amygdala. MGv fibers
mainly terminate in layers 3 and 4 of AUD, and less so
in layers 1, 5, and 6 (Romanski and LeDoux, 1993; Cetas
et al., 1999; Winer et al., 1999b, Smith et al., 2012). The projections from MGv to the AUD are convergent, highly
topographic, spatially focal, and originate from only
one type of MGv neuron. With the exception of its caudal pole, MGv does not distribute outside the auditory
region. Further, aside from a small percentage of MGv
neurons which make synaptic contacts with GABAergic
interneurons, most MGv fibers terminate on pyramidal
cells (Vernby et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2012). MGd also
distributes to layers 3 and 4 of AUD, but more heavily
to the “auditory belt” cortex. More specifically, MGd
neurons target posterodorsal and ventral components
of these auditory regions, which lie immediately below
the ventral division of AUD (Arnault and Roger, 1990;
Winer et al., 1999b; Kimura et al., 2003, 2004, 2007a, 2010;
Donishi et al., 2006). MGd fibers primarily synapse on
dendritic spines or shafts of pyramidal cells, with a few

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Ventral Anterior and Ventral Lateral Nuclei

contacts on GABAergic cells of the granular layer (Smith
et al., 2012). The projections from MGm to the cortex are
divergent, similar to those of MGd. MGm neurons favor
cortical areas Te2 and Te3, as opposed to the primary
auditory cortex. Overall, projections arise from several
types of geniculate neurons and largely terminate in
middle cortical layers of these auditory zones (Roger
and Arnault, 1989; Arnault and Roger, 1990; Winer et al.,
1999b; Kimura et al., 2003).
All medial geniculate nuclei, except MGv, also distribute to temporal association areas such as the perirhinal
cortex and to the amygdala. A common feature of the
medially located MG, the SG, and the PIL is that each
targets the upper part of layer 1 of temporal association cortices—in addition to more specific projections to
deeper layers (Linke and Schwegler, 2000). SG also distributes to the medial agranular (frontal) cortex (AGm)
(Kurokawa and Saito, 1995). Projections to the amygdala,
primarily to the lateral nucleus and some to the basal
nuclei, arise from the medially located MGm, the SG,
and PIL, as well as from lateral parts of the parvicellular subparafascicular nucleus (LeDoux et al., 1985, 1990;
Turner and Herkenham, 1991; Namura et al., 1997; Doron
and LeDoux, 1999, 2000). In addition, medial subnuclei
of the MG complex reciprocally connect with structures
of the basal ganglia including caudal parts of the dorsal
striatum, the amygdalostriatal transition zone and the
posterior globus pallidus (Moriizumi and Hattori, 1992;
Shammah-Lagnado et al., 1996).

Functional Aspects
As evident from anatomical and physiological data,
MGv is the main thalamic relay to the primary auditory cortex, subserving specific tonal analysis of sounds
(LeDoux et al., 1987; Romanski and LeDoux, 1993; Bordi
and LeDoux, 1994a; Winer et al., 1999b). The functions of
the MGd are less clear, but are probably concerned with
non-tonal aspects of sounds and integration with other
sensory modalities. The projections from the IC to MGd
stem from a region of the colliculus that is not tonotopically organized. Similarly, MGd projections to temporal cortices are also less strictly organized and mainly
terminate in auditory association areas (LeDoux et al.,
1987; Clerici and Coleman, 1990). Reciprocal MGd connections with the posterodorsal division of Te2 suggest a
role for MGd in the Te2 involvement in auditory spatial
processing (Kimura et al., 2004, 2010; Smith et al., 2012).
The superficial, dorsal region of MGd may be a visualrecipient rather than an auditory-recipient zone of the
MG complex (Sun et al., 1996; Shi and Cassell, 1997).
The MGm, like MGd, is not tonotopically organized
and has multimodal connections with auditory and nonauditory structures (He, 2003). The functions of MGm, as
well as those of SG, SPF and PIL, need to be interpreted

349

in the context of their connections with temporal association cortices, the amygdala, and the basal ganglia. In fact,
the relationship of these MG nuclei to the amygdala has
been the focus of numerous studies examining their role
in auditory-associated emotional responses. It is clear
that these pathways connecting the auditory system
with limbic regions of the brain participate in emotional
and mnemonic aspects of sounds. The studies of LeDoux
and colleagues have demonstrated that MGm, PIL and
lateral part of SPF serve to link neutral stimuli (sounds)
to emotionally negative (or noxious) events—underlying fear conditioning (LeDoux, 1993, 2000). The convergence of auditory and somatosensory information,
as well as that from other sensory modalities, in MGm
and associated medial auditory nuclei appears to provide the neuronal basis for such associations which are
then behaviorally expressed in the amygdala (LeDoux
et al., 1987; Bordi and LeDoux, 1994a, 1994b; Linke et al.,
1999; LeDoux, 2000; Weinberger, 2011). In addition to
the amygdala, MGm and PIL are critical for the expression of auditory fear conditioning (LeDoux, 2000; Maren
et al., 2001; Komura et al., 2001; Parsons et al., 2006; Han
et al., 2008; Orsini and Maren, 2009), in that lesions of
these nuclei prevent auditory fear conditioning (LeDoux
et al., 1984, 1986; Campeau and Davis, 1995). The MGm
and PIL have also been shown to be links in pathways
leading to the neuroendocrine expression of audiogenic
stress via the amygdala, and ultimately, the hypothalamic paraventricular–hypophysis axis (Campeau et al.,
1997; Campeau and Watson, 2000). Thus, the medially
located nuclei of MG are important in associating auditory signals with other sensory events, and the “translation” of this information, via the amygdala and temporal
association cortices, into behavioral and emotional
responses (Lanuza et al., 2008).

VENTRAL ANTERIOR AND VENTRAL
LATERAL NUCLEI
While the ventral anterior (VA) and ventral lateral
(VL) nuclei of primates are clearly separate and distinct groups (Jones, 2007), the VA and VL nuclei of rats
are cytoarchitectonically similar and consequently are
generally combined, with the designation the ventral
anterior/ventral lateral (VA/VL) complex—or VAL
(Swanson, 2004). The VA/VL complex occupies an
extensive nuclear area located between the ventral posterior nuclei ventrolaterally, the posterior and lateral
dorsal nuclei dorsally, and the intralaminar and anterior
nuclei dorsomedially. Ventromedially, the VA/VL complex abuts the ventromedial nucleus. The VA/VL complex is a rather cell sparse region and contains relatively
large neurons. In acetylcholinesterase-stained sections,
VA/VL exhibits low activity and is therefore readily

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

350

16. THALAMUS

delineated from surrounding nuclei such as the RT and
the anterior complex (Paxinos and Watson, 2014).

Afferent and Efferent Projections
VA/VL receives afferents from three major sources:
the substantia nigra-pars reticulata (SNr), the globus
pallidus (GP), and the cerebellum. VA/VL is also reciprocally connected with somatomotor and premotor
cortices. Additional subcortical inputs derive from the
vestibular nuclei, the anterior pretectal nucleus, and the
zona incerta (Shiroyama et al., 1999; Barthó et al., 2002;
Bokor et al., 2005; Giber et al., 2008). Cerebellar inputs
arise from deep cerebellar nuclei, primarily the lateral
and interpositus nuclei (Angaut et al., 1985; Sawyer et al.,
1994a, 1994b; Aumann et al., 1994, 1996), while those of
GP originate from the internal segment of GP (GPi)—
or the rat homolog, the entopeduncular nucleus (EN)
(Deniau and Chevalier, 1992; Deniau et al., 1992; Sakai
et al., 1998; Sakai and Grofova, 2002; Sakai and Bruce,
2004; Kuramoto et al., 2011).
There is a segregation of inputs to VA and VL in primates such that SNr projects selectively to VA, GPi to
the oral (or anterior) part of VL, and the cerebellum to
the caudal (or posterior) part of VL (Jones, 2007). A similar segregation of inputs exists for the rat; that is, major
afferents to VA/VL terminate in discrete, essentially
non-overlapping zones of VA/VL. Specifically, fibers
from the basal ganglia (SNr and EN) distribute to rostromedial parts of VA/VL, whereas those from the cerebellum innervate caudolateral aspects of VA/VL (Angaut
et al., 1985; Deniau et al., 1992; Sakai et al., 1998; Bodor et al.,
2008; Kuramoto et al., 2011). Within the rostromedial (or
rostro-ventromedial) VA/VL, there is a further segregation of inputs from SNr and EN such that SNr fibers
distribute virtually throughout the rostro-ventromedial
VA/VL, while those of EN are mainly restricted to caudolateral parts of this region. SNr projections to VA/VL
significantly outnumber those from EN (Kuramoto et al.
2011).
The terminal endings of basal ganglia (SNr and EN)
and cerebellar fibers distributing to VA/VL are also
distinctly different: SNr/EN boutons are mainly large
and GABAergic, while cerebellar terminals are large
and glutamatergic—VGLUT2 positive (Kha et al., 2000,
2001; Bokor et al., 2005; Lavallée et al., 2005; Bodor et al.,
2008; Kuramoto et al., 2011). Cerebellar terminals in VA/
VL display properties of “drivers”; that is, they contain
large round vesicles (or the RL type) interspersed with
closely packed small round vesicles (Sherman and Guillery, 2006). This morphology is consistent with the excitatory nature of the cerebellothalamic projections to VA/
VL (Sawyer et al., 1994b). These large cerebellar originating terminals, however, make up a minority of presynaptic terminals in VA/VL, with the majority being of

the RS-type originating from the cortex. While SNr/EN
fibers to VA/VL also terminate as large boutons, they are
GABAergic and hence by their inhibitory nature would
not qualify as drivers, despite the fact that inhibition of
SNr/EN cells (disinhibition) results in a pronounced
excitation of thalamocortical VA/VL fibers—akin to
driving (Sherman and Guillery, 2006).
In addition to basal ganglia and cerebellar afferents,
VA/VL receives pronounced input from somatomotor
cortices (M1, M2 and S1) as well as from frontal and parietal cortical areas. In particular, the rostromedial sector
of VA/VL is targeted by fibers from the prefrontal cortex
(Sesack et al., 1989; Condé et al., 1990; Reep and Corwin,
1999; Vertes, 2002). As indicated, cortical inputs are most
likely the source of RS-type (modulatory) projections to
VA/VL.
Comparable to the differential distribution of afferents to VA/VL, there appears to be a similar segregation
of outputs from VA/VL to somatomotor cortices (Aldes,
1988; Yamamoto et al., 1990; Aumann et al., 1998; Mitchell and Cauller, 2001; Kuramato et al., 2009; Hooks et al.,
2013). Using viral vectors to trace projections of single
neurons of VA/VL, Kuramoto et al. (2009) described differing patterns of projections from two regions of VA/
VL, namely, from a rostromedial area that receives inhibitory fibers from the basal ganglia, termed an inhibitory
zone (IZ), and from a caudolateral region that receives
excitatory cerebellar inputs, termed an excitatory zone
(EZ) (Fig. 2). IZ neurons mainly terminate in layer 1 of
somatomotor cortices and send collateral projections
to the striatum. By contrast, EZ neurons distribute to
middle cortical layers and do not branch to the striatum.
Among other things, this suggests that the basal ganglia
dominated region of VA/VL completes a loop with the
striatum (striatum>SNr/EN>VA/VL>striatum) and
also via collaterals, directly affects the cortex. Inhibitory
(basal ganglia) and excitatory (cerebellum) regions of
VA/VL modulate different lamina of the cortex—with
likely differential effects on the output and function of
the motor cortex (see below).

Functional Aspects
The VA/VL complex is the main motor thalamic
relay to the cortex. As discussed, VA/VL receives major
inputs from the basal ganglia (BG) and the cerebellum,
which largely target non-overlapping regions of VA/
VL. In addition, neurons from BG and cerebellar receptive zones of VA/VL distribute to separate lamina of the
motor cortex: from the BG receptive region to layer 1
and from the cerebellar zone to deep layers, including
layer 5. Based in part on these hodological differences,
Kuramoto et al. (2009) proposed that the two main VA/
VL thalamocortical systems serve different functions in
motor control. Specifically, basal ganglia information

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Ventral Medial Nucleus

351

FIGURE 2  (A) Schematic diagram of motor thalamocortical projections. The rostromedial sector of the ventral anterior and ventral lateral (VAVL) nuclei of thalamus mainly receives inhibitory inputs from the basal ganglia and has thus been designated the inhibitory zone (IZ), whereas
the caudolateral VA-VL receives excitatory afferents from the cerebellum and has been termed the excitatory zone (EZ). IZ neurons send axons to
the striatum (neostriatum) as well as to the cortex, whereas EZ neurons project selectively to the cortex. Furthermore, the main cortical target of
EZ neurons is layers II-V of the motor cortex while that of IZ neurons includes layer I. (B) Function of IZ and EZ neurons in the context of motor
execution. Basal ganglia information relayed through the IZ zone of VA-VL to distal apical dendrites of layer I of the motor cortex modulates the
“gain” of layer V pyramidal cells, thereby producing a readiness signal for movement. By comparison, cerebellar signals relayed through the EZ
zone of VA-VL to the basal dendrites/soma of layer IV/V cells serve as a motor command (or go signal) for the execution of movement. See text
for further details. From Kuramoto, E., Furuta, T., Nakamura, K.C., Unzai, T., Hioki, H., & Kaneko, T. (2009). Two types of thalamocortical projections from
the motor thalamic nuclei of the rat: a single neuron-tracing study using viral vectors. Cerebral Cortex 19, 2065–2077.

relayed through VA/VL to the distal apical dendrites
of layer 1 of the motor cortex modulates the “gain” of
layer 5 pyramidal cells, thereby producing a readiness
signal for movement. By comparison, cerebellar signals
relayed through VA/VL to the basal dendrites/soma of
layer 4/5 cells serve as a motor command (or go signal)
for the execution of movement (Fig. 2). In this sense, the
motor thalamus is critical both for preparing and initiating movements (Kuramoto et al., 2009).
The thalamocortical and basal ganglia systems participate in a number of parallel, functionally segregated circuits (Deniau et al., 1994, 1996; Groenewegen et al., 1990,
1999; Haber and Calzavara, 2009). As will be discussed
with other thalamic nuclei, there are multiple anatomical/functional loops linking the cortex, basal ganglia
and thalamus. These parallel systems appear to consist
of a main loop from the cortex to striatum to thalamus
and back to the point of origin in the cortex, and a “secondary” loop from the basal ganglia to the thalamus and
then directly back to the basal ganglia. Accordingly, the
thalamus (or VA/VL) is pivotally positioned to modulate corticostriatal circuitry through multiple routes.

VENTRAL MEDIAL NUCLEUS
The ventral medial nucleus (VM) of thalamus is a rostrocaudally elongated nucleus located in the rostromedial part of the thalamus. Medially, VM can be clearly
distinguished from the cell-sparse submedial nucleus.
The mammillothalamic tract ascends just medial to VM.

Dorsally and laterally, VM is bordered by VA/VL and
more caudally by VPM and VPL. VM can be differentiated from these nuclei in Nissl-stained sections as it
contains relatively small and densely packed neurons. In
acetylcholinesterase-stained sections, the ventral medial
nucleus exhibits low activity (Paxinos et al., 1999). With
respect to calcium-binding proteins, VM contains calbindin D28K-positive neurons throughout the nucleus,
while calretinin-positive cells are restricted to its medial
part (Arai et al., 1994). A low density of calbindin D28Kand parvalbumin-positive fibers is present in the ventral
medial nucleus.

Afferent and Efferent Projections
The ventral medial nucleus, along with VA/VL, comprises the motor thalamus. Major inputs to VM originate from the basal ganglia, mainly from the substantia
nigra-pars reticulata (SNr) and to a lesser degree from
the entopeduncular nucleus (EN) (Herkenham, 1979;
Deniau et al., 1992; Sakai et al., 1998; Kuramoto et al.,
2011). Unlike VA/VL, VM receives few fibers from the
cerebellum. Kuramoto et al. (2011) described the presence of large VGLUT2 terminals of cerebellar origin
in VA/VL (see above), but failed to observe them in
VM, and further showed that small to medium sized
VGLUT2-containing varicosities in VM persisted after
removal of cerebellar afferents to the thalamus suggesting a non-cerebellar origin. As discussed below, a likely
source of excitatory (glutamatergic) input to VM is the

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

352

16. THALAMUS

dorsal reticular nucleus of the medulla—which reportedly serves to relay nociceptive information to VM
(Villanueva et al., 1998). SNr and EN fibers to VM preferentially target medial parts of VM, while lateral regions
are less densely innervated (Carter and Fibiger, 1978;
Herkenham, 1979; Deniau et al., 1994; Groenewegen
et al., 1999). Other subcortical projections to VM originate from deep layers of the superior colliculus, deep
mesencephalic nucleus, PAG, raphe nuclei, the peripeduncular region, laterodorsal tegmental nucleus, locus
coeruleus, the parabrachial region, and the trigeminal
complex (Herkenham, 1979; Krout and Loewy, 2000a,
2000b; Krout et al., 2001, 2002). Cortical afferents to VM
arise from a rather extensive region of the frontal cortex including the primary and secondary motor cortices
(Herkenham, 1979; Sesack et al., 1989; Hurley et al., 1991;
Desbois and Villanueva, 2001; Vertes, 2002).
VM distributes fairly widely throughout the cortex,
most heavily to rostral, frontal regions of cortex but less
so to more caudal areas (Herkenham, 1979; Condé et al.,
1990; Reep et al., 1996; Desbois and Villanueva, 2001;
Hoover and Vertes, 2007). With respect to laminar organization, VM fibers terminate in superficial parts of layer
1 over widespread regions of the frontal cortex, with a
concentration in somatomotor cortices (Herkenham, 1979;
Arbuthnott et al., 1990; Condé et al., 1990, 1995; Reep et al.,
1994; Reep and Corwin, 1999; Desbois and Villanueva,
2001; Mitchell and Cauller, 2001; Hoover and Vertes, 2007).

Functional Aspects
While VM together with VA/VL constitute the motor
thalamus, there are anatomical differences between
VM and VA/VL signifying functional distinctions. For
instance, unlike VA/VL, VM does not receive input from
the cerebellum. Further, SNr differentially distributes to
these two divisions of the motor thalamus. The dorsal
SNr projects to VM, terminating on distal dendrites of
VM neurons, whereas the ventral SNr targets VA/VL
forming axosomatic synapses with VA/VL cells (Sakai
et al., 1998; Cebrian et al., 2005; Gulcebi et al., 2012). This
arrangement has led to the proposal that ventral SNr
afferents to VA/VL (axosomatic endings) would have
a marked, direct effect on VA/VL neurons. By comparison, dorsal SNr terminals on thin, distal dendrites
of VM neurons would exert a more modulatory influence on VM cells (Sakai et al., 1998). Consistent with this,
VM distributes to layer 1 over a large area of the frontal
cortex, whereas the output of VA/VL is mainly bound
for motor cortices to thereby exert a direct influence on
motor activity (see above).
As such, VM might be viewed as playing a modulatory role in thalamocortical circuitry, and by virtue of distributing widely throughout the frontal cortex, appears
positioned to influence multiple corticostriatal systems

(Groenewegen et al., 1999). VM may be a source of attentional effects on the cortex, and it is thus noteworthy that
the dorsomedial SNr that targets VM receives strong
input from nucleus accumbens which participates in
attentional mechanisms (Deniau and Chevalier, 1992;
Deniau et al., 1994, 1996; Montaron et al., 1996).
A proposed role for VM in attention gains further support from studies by Villanueva and co-workers describing the involvement of the lateral part of VM (VMl) in
nociception (Villanueva et al., 1998; Monconduit et al.,
1999, 2003; Desbois and Villanueva, 2001; Monconduit and Villanueva, 2005). Cells of the dorsal reticular
nucleus of the medulla are activated by various types
of nociceptive stimuli applied over the body, and this
information is then transmitted to the lateral division
of VM (VMl), and from there to an extensive region of
the frontal cortex, most heavily to somatomotor cortices
(Villanueva et al., 1998; Monconduit et al., 1999). Accordingly, through VMl, pain signals gain direct access to
widespread regions of the cortex. This “fast” route for
the transfer of nociceptive information to the cortex may
prime the cortex for coordinated motor and behavioral
responses to painful stimuli (Monconduit et al., 1999;
Monconduit and Villanueva, 2005).

MEDIODORSAL NUCLEUS
The mediodorsal nucleus (MD) of the thalamus is
located medial and dorsal to the internal medullary
lamina of thalamus and ventral to the stria medullaris/
habenular complex. The paraventricular and intermediodorsal nuclei are situated between the left and right sides
of MD. The mediodorsal nucleus is bordered rostrally by
the paratenial nucleus (PT) and caudally by the parafascicular nucleus of the intralaminar thalamus. Therefore,
MD is virtually “encircled” by midline and intralaminar
nuclei with which it shares several connections. The MD
in rats is divided into three segments: medial (MDm),
central (MDc) and lateral (MDl) divisions, and generally
a fourth part, lateral to MDl, termed the paralamellar
MD (MDpl)—as it abuts the internal medullary lamina
(Leonard, 1969, 1972; Krettek and Price, 1977; Groenewegen, 1988). Distinctions between segments are based on
cytoarchitectonics and input–output relationships. The
central segment is rich in myelinated fibers and, in that
respect, stands out from the other segments. The lateral
segment has the highest activity for acetylcholinesterase (Paxinos et al., 1999). The differential distribution
of calcium-binding proteins also confirms distinctions
between segments. This is most apparent with respect
to calbindin D28K, which is present in both cell bodies and fibers in the medial and lateral segments, but
much less so in the central segment (Arai et al., 1994).
Stellate and fusiform cells make up the majority of the

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Mediodorsal Nucleus

353

neuronal populations of MD, both considered to be
thalamocortical neurons (Kuroda et al., 1992, 1998). Stellate cells are most abundant in MDc, whereas fusiform
neurons are more numerous in MDm and MDl. Interneurons are very rare, if present, in the rat mediodorsal nucleus. Dendrites of stellate and fusiform neurons
largely remain within the segment in which their soma
resides, stressing the morphological distinction between
the segments (Kuroda et al., 1992). On the basis of differences in fiber densities and connections, Ray and Price
(1992) further subdivided MDl into dorsal and ventral
parts. In general, the rat MDm and MDc are thought to
be homologous to the medial magnocellular segment of
the primate MD, while the rat MDl is homologous to the
primate parvocellular, lateral segment of MD.

Afferent and Efferent Projections
The different segments of MD are characterized by
distinct input–output relationships. On the whole, MD is
strongly reciprocally connected with the medial, orbital
and insular prefrontal cortices (Krettek and Price, 1977;
Reep and Winans, 1982; Groenewegen, 1988; Condé
et al., 1990; Ray and Price, 1992; Reep and Corwin, 1999;
Vertes, 2002, 2004; Jasmin et al., 2004; Gabbott et al., 2005;
Rotaru et al., 2005; Hoover and Vertes, 2007, 2011). In fact,
the prefrontal cortex of rodents was initially designated
as a “MD projection cortex” (Leonard, 1969; Uylings
and van Eden, 1990). As with other regions of the PFC
(see below), connections between MD and the medial
PFC (mPFC) are highly topographically organized such
that medial to lateral segments of MD are mapped onto
ventral to dorsal regions of the mPFC. Specifically, the
medial part of MD (MDm) connects with the infralimbic cortex (IL) (Fig. 3), the lateral part of MDm and MDc
with the prelimbic cortex and ventral anterior cingulate
(AC) cortex, the MDl with the dorsal AC, and MDpl with
the medial agranular (motor) cortex (AGm or M2) (Groenewegen, 1988; Ray and Price, 1992; Vertes, 2002; Hoover
and Vertes, 2007). Similar to the mPFC, specific segments
of MD connect with distinct regions of the orbital cortex. MDm is reciprocally linked to the medial orbital
(MO) cortex, MDc to the lateral orbital cortex, MDl to
the ventral (VO) and ventrolateral (VLO) orbital cortices,
and ventral aspects of MDc and MDl to the dorsolateral
orbital (DLO) cortex (Groenewegen, 1988; Ray and Price,
1992; Hoover and Vertes, 2011). With respect to the insular cortex, MDm interconnects with the dorsal (AId) and
posterior (AIp) agranular insular cortices, and MDc with
the ventral agranular insular cortex (AIv) (Groenewegen, 1988; Ray and Price, 1992; Jasmin et al., 2004). While
there is a clear segregation of inputs/outputs of the various segments of MD with subregions of the PFC, there
is also fairly considerable overlap in these connections—
likely signifying shared functional properties.

FIGURE 3  Darkfield photomicrograph of a transverse section
through the diencephalon showing patterns of labeling at the midthalamus produced by an injection of the anterograde tracer, PHA-L, in
the rat infralimbic cortex. Note the pronounced labeling in the medial
division of the mediodorsal (MDm) nuclei, dorsally, and the nucleus
reuniens (RE), ventrally. Abbreviations: MT, mammillothalamic tract;
3V, third ventricle. Scale bar=500 μm. From Vertes, R.P. (2002). Analysis
of projections from the medial prefrontal cortex to the thalamus in the rat,
with emphasis on nucleus reuniens. Journal of Comparative Neurology
442, 163–187.

A seemingly unique feature of MD projections to
the cortex is that they are virtually restricted to the
PFC (orbitomedial and insular cortices) and only minimally extend to other regions of the cortex. In addition,
whereas MD receives substantial subcortical inputs (see
below), the subcortical projections of MD are limited and
mainly directed to the dorsal and ventral striatum.
Most subcortical structures projecting to MD target
specific segments of MD, but some (mainly of the brainstem) distribute throughout MD (Young et al., 1984;
Groenewegen, 1988; Kuroda and Price, 1991a, 1991b;
Ray and Price, 1992; Vertes, 1991, 1992; Zahm et al., 1996;
Morin and Meyer-Berstein, 1999; Vertes et al., 1999; Krout
et al., 2002; Tripathi et al., 2012). As developed further
below, MD is typically described as composed of three
functional units: motor (MDl/MDpl), olfactory (MDc)
and limbic (MDm), and with some overlap, subcortical
inputs to MD reflect these functional divisions. Aside
from sites projecting to all divisions of MD, afferents

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

354

16. THALAMUS

to lateral segments of MD (MDl/MDpl) mainly derive
from structures of the basal ganglia and the brainstem.
These include the internal segment of the globus pallidus
(GPi) and the substantia nigra-pars reticulata (SNr) of
the basal ganglia, and the superior colliculus, pretectum,
and acetylcholine-containing laterodorsal tegmental
nucleus (LDT) of the brainstem. Inputs to MDc predominately originate from olfactory structures including the piriform cortex, endopiriform nucleus, olfactory
tubercle, horizontal limb of diagonal band nucleus and
the lateral preoptic area. Afferents to MDm arise from a
greater number and more diverse set of structures than
to the other divisions likely reflecting its involvement in
limbic-associated functions. They include inputs from
the nucleus accumbens/ventral pallidum, diagonal
band nuclei, the anterior cortical, basal and accessory
basal nuclei of the amygdala, the ventral tegmental area
(VTA), the substantia nigra-pars compacta (SNc), the
supramammillary nucleus, and the lateral entorhinal
cortex (Groenewegen, 1988; Ray and Price, 1992; Vertes,
1992).
While the foregoing indicates a relatively clear segregation of inputs to separate segments of MD, the overlap
indicates some integration across segments of MD. All
divisions of MD receive common inputs from several
sites including the reticular nucleus of thalamus, VTA,
the mesopontine reticular formation, pedunculopontine
tegmental nucleus, locus coeruleus, LDT, and the dorsal
and median raphe nuclei of the brainstem (Groenewegen, 1988; Vertes, 1991; Vertes et al., 1999; Krout et al.,
2002). The input-output relationships of MD appear
so structured that separate segments/divisions of MD
could function independently or as a whole dependent
on task demands.

Functional Aspects
The different segments of the mediodorsal nucleus
appear to serve distinct functions, but the “resolution”
provided by behavioral studies using lesions or inactivation of MD is generally too coarse to reliably distinguish between different parts of MD. Furthermore, MD
borders the midline and intralaminar thalamic nuclei
and their possible involvement would also hinder the
interpretation of lesion studies. Despite this, the functions of MD have been fairly extensively investigated
and should be considered within the context of limbic
and basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuits with which
MD is linked (Groenewegen et al., 1990; Deniau et al.,
1994; Zahm, 2000; Block et al., 2007; Aggleton et al., 2011;
Mailly et al., 2013). Specifically, the connections of MDm
suggest a role in limbic-related functions, MDc in olfactory behaviors, and MDl/MDpl in motor functions.
The feature that most defines MD is its unique relationship with the prefrontal cortex and hence MD

functions parallel those of the PFC. One function commonly associated with MD is behavioral flexibility—or
the capacity to alter behavior to meet changing contingencies (McAlonan et al., 1993; Hunt and Aggleton, 1998;
Block et al., 2007; Dolleman-van der Weel et al., 2009).
Rats with MD lesions (or inactivation) are unable to
readily switch from one response to another in the face
of changing task demands. Although several factors
are likely involved, the deficit is generally attributed to
perseverative responding, or maintaining a previously
rewarded response strategy despite it being incorrect
or unrewarded upon changed conditions. For example,
Block et al. (2007) demonstrated that rats with bilateral
MD lesions, or disconnecting MD from the mPFC, were
unable to successfully switch from a “response” strategy (e.g., all right turns) to a visually cued strategy (or
vice versa) on a four arm cross-maze. They postulated
that MD “directs” the mPFC to switch strategies and the
mPFC, in turn, suppresses incorrect responses in favor
of correct ones to the new paradigm. Perhaps an even
more striking example of failures in set shifting with MD
lesions involved the use of a relatively undemanding reference memory task in the water maze (Dolleman-van der
Weel et al., 2009). MD lesioned rats were slow to acquire
a water maze task, which reportedly was the result of
“perseverance” of edge swimming (thigmotaxis) carried
over from pretraining. These rats were also impaired in
the change of task conditions in the probe test from a
hidden platform to a visible one. In effect, even though
the platform was visible, MD lesioned rats continued to
search for the hidden platform—a clearly perseverative
response. The deficits in switching strategies described
with MD lesions are characteristic (or a hallmark) of dysfunctions of the prefrontal cortex (Ragozzino et al., 1999;
Birrell and Brown, 2000; Dias and Aggleton, 2000; Stefani
et al., 2003; Floresco et al., 2006; Rich and Shapiro, 2009).
This clearly points, then, to the interdependence of the
two structures in these behaviors—or otherwise stated,
the integrative actions of MD and the mPFC appear vital
for flexible choice behavior.
In addition to a role in behavioral flexibility, the mPFC
is an important component of an extended circuitry subserving recognition memory; that is, a circuitry which
also includes the perirhinal cortex, hippocampus and
MD (Ennaceur et al., 1996; Norman and Eacott, 2004;
Barker et al., 2007; Barker and Warbuton, 2011; Cross
et al., 2012). Recognition memory involves the ability to
identify stimuli based on previous experience with them,
and judgments can be made using various types of information such as an object’s characteristics (familiarity) or
where (spatial location) or when (temporal order) it was
encountered. Barker et al. (2007) examined the contribution of the mPFC to the different components of recognition memory showing that mPFC lesions spared single
item recognition (novel object preference) as well as

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

355

Submedial Nucleus

object location (spatial displacement), but significantly
disrupted associative object recognition (object in place
task) and recency judgments (temporal order). With
respect to MD, Cross et al. (2012) subsequently demonstrated that MD lesions (or disconnecting MD from the
mPFC) produced the same types of recognition memory
deficits as seen with mPFC lesions (Barker et al., 2007);
that is, intact single item recognition but marked impairments on associative recognition memory and recency
discrimination. These findings suggest a conjoint action
of MD and the mPFC in recognition memory.
As discussed, MDc is associated with the olfactory system. Unlike other sensory systems, olfactory
information reaching the olfactory cortex is not first
relayed through the thalamus but passes directly from
the olfactory bulbs to the piriform cortex—and from
there to orbital regions of the PFC (Price, 1990; Stevenson and Boakes, 2003). An alternate route to the
orbital PFC involves the transfer of olfactory information from the piriform cortex (and other olfactory
regions) to MD and then to the PFC. Since odors can
be identified and differentiated at the piriform cortex,
the olfactory path through MD undoubtedly serves
other functions, prime candidates of which are olfactory attention and learning (for review, Tham et al.,
2009). While some reports found that rats with MD
lesions could not effectively discriminate between
olfactory stimuli, particularly if stimuli were novel or
difficult to identify (Eichenbaum et al., 1980; Staubli
et al., 1987), other studies failed to demonstrate this but
rather showed that MD lesions significantly impaired
olfactory learning (Slotnick and Kaneko, 1981; Lu and
Slotnick, 1990; Koger and Mair, 1994; McBride and
Slotnick, 1997; Zhang et al., 1998). For instance, Slotnick and colleagues (Slotnick and Kaneko, 1981; Lu
and Slotnick, 1990; McBride and Slotnick, 1997) demonstrated that rats with MD lesions could accurately
detect and discriminate between odors, but were deficient in reversal tasks in which reward values for odors
were reversed. Importantly, deficits were most severe
with MDc lesions, were not seen with visual reversal
tasks, and were equally pronounced following disconnection of MD from the orbital cortex as with bilateral
MD lesions—thus directly implicating MD-orbital PFC
connections in these effects.
On the human level, MD has been linked to processes
of olfactory attention. Specifically, using fMRI techniques, Plailly et al. (2008) reported that subjects attending to odors (but not to tones) showed elevated activity
selectively in a pathway from the piriform cortex to MD
and from MD to the orbital PFC, while Tham et al. (2011a,
2011b) described a number of “attention-related” deficits
in subjects with damage to MD including a reduced ability to detect the presence or absence of suprathreshold
olfactory stimuli.

SUBMEDIAL NUCLEUS
The submedial nucleus (SM) is a relatively small
nucleus in the mid-rostrocaudal part of the thalamus.
SM is situated in between the RE and RH medially and
VM laterally. This nucleus is also referred to as nucleus
gelatinosus (Krieg, 1944; Jones, 1985, 2007). SM is relatively cell-sparse and stands out against neighboring
nuclei in neurofilament-stained sections. Although there
exists a light plexus of parvalbumin-positive fibers in
SM, calcium-binding proteins are otherwise virtually
absent from the nucleus (Arai et al., 1994). In particular,
calbindin D28K is conspicuously absent from SM making it readily identifiable in sections stained for this protein (Paxinos et al., 1999). SM is generally divided into
rostro-ventral and caudo-dorsal parts primarily based
on the differential distribution of afferents to them: olfactory projections to the rostro-ventral SM, and somatosensory inputs to the dorsal SM (Yoshida et al., 1992). The
caudo-dorsal part of SM exhibits high acetylcholinesterase activity (Paxinos and Watson, 2014), most probably
related to substantial cholinergic afferents from the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus (Yoshida et al., 1992).

Afferent and Efferent Projections
Since the original description by Craig and Burton
(1981) of afferents from the superficial layers of the spinal dorsal horn and spinal trigeminal nucleus to the
submedial nucleus, SM has been associated with nociception and pain modulation (for review, Tang et al.,
2009). However, in addition to ascending somatosensory inputs, SM also receives projections from olfactory structures (Price and Slotnick, 1983; Yoshida et al.,
1992). Olfactory fibers mainly distribute to rostro-ventral
parts of SM and derive from deep layers of the prepiriform cortex and endopiriform nucleus. Olfactory inputs
originate from the same regions projecting to the central segment of MD (MDc), although those to SM arise
from a more restricted area of the olfactory cortex. SM is
strongly reciprocally connected with the ventral orbital
cortex and to a lesser extent with other orbital areas: lateral (LO), ventral (VO) and medial (MO) orbital cortices (Yoshida et al., 1992; Coffield et al., 1992; Reep et al.,
1996; Hoover and Vertes, 2011). The dorsal peduncular
cortex, ventral to the infralimbic cortex, and the dorsal
subiculum are additional sources of cortical inputs to SM
(Witter et al., 1990; Yoshida et al., 1992).
Subcortical fibers to SM originate from the diagonal
band nuclei, the lateral hypothalamus, and reticular
nucleus of thalamus of the forebrain, and from deep
layers of the superior colliculus, reticular formation,
parabrachial nuclei, laterodorsal tegmental nucleus,
and the spinal trigeminal complex of the brainstem
(Yoshida et al., 1991, 1992; Krout et al., 2001, 2002; Krout

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

356

16. THALAMUS

and Loewy, 2000a). In view of SM’s role in nociception,
afferents from the trigeminal complex and dorsal horn
of the spinal cord have received specific attention (Craig
and Burton, 1981; Dado and Giessler, 1990; Yoshida et al.,
1991; Blomqvist et al., 1992; Iwata et al., 1992). In cats,
trigemino- and spinothalamic afferents to SM are glutamatergic (Ericson et al., 1995), whereas in rats, trigeminothalamic neurons appear to express substance P (Li,
1999). Trigeminothalamic fibers, originating from the
caudal spinal trigeminal complex, terminate as RL-type
terminals on dendritic protrusions forming glomeruli,
surrounded by glial elements (Ma and Ohara, 1987;
Ma et al., 1988; Ericson et al., 1996). There are additional
“simple” boutons-en-passage of both trigeminal and
spinal origin in the submedial nucleus, at least in cats
(Ericson et al., 1996). Cortical afferents most likely end as
RS-type terminals, while some large boutons with flattened vesicles are also present (Ma et al., 1988).

sensory neglect (Corwin et al., 1994; Corwin and Reep,
1998; Reep et al. 2003; Cheatwood et al., 2005; Reep and
Corwin, 2009). In addition to SM and VLO, the system
includes the medial agranular (motor) cortex, the posterior parietal cortex, secondary visual areas and the dorsocentral striatum. As described, SM receives a relatively
diverse set of afferents from limbic-related regions of the
brainstem and forebrain. Accordingly, through SM, multimodal affective information would reach VLO, and
VLO could thus provide emotional input to a complex
circuitry responsible for directed attention. Finally, the
submedial nucleus, like the central part of MD, receives
olfactory input and SM-orbital projections may complement those from MDc to the orbital cortex in its role in
olfactory attention (Tham et al., 2009).

Functional Aspects

Three distinct nuclei in the rostral one-third of the
thalamus belong to the anterior complex of the thalamus: the anterodorsal (AD), anteroventral (AV), and
anteromedial (AM) nuclei. The AM nucleus fuses medially to form the interanteromedial nucleus (IAM) which
extends slightly caudal to the other anterior nuclei. In
Nissl-stained sections, the anterodorsal nucleus is most
conspicuous because of its large, darkly stained cells. The
anteromedial and anteroventral nuclei have smaller and
lighter staining neurons and, although the cell density
in AV is lower than that of AM, in Nissl-stained sections
the border between these nuclei is somewhat difficult to
define. However, in sections stained for AChE, a clear
distinction can be made between the anterior nuclei, the
AM exhibiting the lowest and the AV the highest activity
for this enzyme (Paxinos et al., 1999). The anterior nuclei
contain varying proportions of cells reactive for calciumbinding proteins but are not conspicuous in this regard
for the thalamus. Neurons positive for calbindin D28K
are present in AM but not in the other anterior nuclei.
Within the anteroventral nucleus, a distinction can be
made between ventrolateral (AVvl) and dorsomedial
(AVdm) parts on the basis of calbindin immunoreactivity: AVvl (like AM) contains a moderately dense calbindin-positive neuropil; AVdm (like AD) virtually none
(Arai et al., 1994).

While SM is involved in multiple functions, it serves
a major role in nociception—or more specifically is part
of a neural circuitry that suppresses painful stimulation.
As indicated, SM receives inputs from layer 1 of the dorsal spinal gray and the spinal trigeminal complex, and
SM cells respond to noxious stimulation (Miletic and
Coffield, 1989; Fu et al., 2002). In a series of studies, Tang
and colleagues provided evidence that SM is an integral
part of an anti-nociceptive system that also involves the
ventrolateral orbital cortex (VLO) and the periaqueductal gray (PAG) (for review, Tang et al., 2009). Specifically,
these structures are critical components of a pain modulatory network which when activated triggers a PAGoriginating descending inhibitory system that suppresses
nociceptive signals at the brainstem and spinal cord. Supporting this, single cells of SM and VLO respond to painful stimulation applied to an extensive area of the body
indicating that they are not well suited to localize sources
of pain, but rather encode affective dimensions of pain
(Dostrovsky and Guilbaud, 1988; Kawakita et al., 1993;
Backonja et al., 1994). Further, activation of SM or VLO
raises the threshold for pain (less painful), whereas the
suppression of SM/VLO lowers the threshold for pain
(Roberts and Dong, 1994; Zhang et al., 1995a, 1995b, 1996;
Zhang et al., 1997a, 1997b; Zhang et al., 1998). Tang et al.
(2009) proposed that local GABAergic neurons of SM and
VLO tonically inhibit output cells of SM/VLO, and that
various modulatory inputs to SM/VLO including serotonergic afferents, suppress GABAergic actions on SM/
VLO cells (disinhibition) thus activating them and triggering a VLO-PAG descending anti-nociceptive system.
In addition to a role in nociception, SM, with links
to VLO, appears part of an extended system subserving directed attention, alterations of which produce

ANTERIOR NUCLEI

Afferent and Efferent Projections
Inputs to the anterior thalamic nuclei (ATh) predominantly derive from the medial prefrontal cortex,
the anterior cingulate cortex, the secondary motor cortex (MO2 or AGm), the retrosplenial cortex (RS), the
subicular domain of the hippocampus, and the mammillary bodies (Swanson and Cowan, 1977; Seki and Zyo,
1984; Witter et al., 1990; Shibata, 1992, 1998; Hopkins,

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Anterior Nuclei

2005; Shibata and Naito, 2005; Wright et al., 2010, 2013;
Yoder and Taube, 2011). Additional sources of input
to the ATh include serotonergic fibers from dorsal and
median raphe nuclei and cholinergic fibers from the
lateral dorsal tegmental (LDT) and pedunculopontine
tegmental (PPT) nuclei (Gonzalo-Ruiz and Lieberman,
1995; Gonzalo-Ruiz et al., 1995; Vertes et al., 2010). Reticular thalamic projections to ATh originate from the rostral, “limbic” portion of RT (Seki and Zyo, 1984; Shibata,
1992; Lozsadi, 1995).
The anterior nuclei, or more specifically AM, IAM and
AV, receive relatively massive input from “limbic” and
non-limbic regions of the PFC (Shibata, 1998; Hopkins,
2005; Shibata and Naito, 2005; Wright et al., 2010, 2013).
Limbic prefrontal projections mainly originate from
the medial wall of the PFC—or the medial orbital cortex (MO), the infralimbic (IL) cortex (Brodmann’s area
25), the prelimbic (PL) cortex (Brodmann’s area 32) and
the anterior (AC) cingulate cortex (Brodmann’s area 24)
(also see Cingulate Cortex and Pain Architecture, Chapter
21). The relative order of strength of PFC projections to
ATh is AC>PL>MO>IL, and all areas appear to distribute more heavily to AM than to AV. AC gives rise to a
pronounced and topographically organized set of projections to AM/AV such that anterior and posterior regions
of AC innervate respective rostral and caudal zones of
AM/AV (Shibata and Naito, 2005). Projections from the
secondary motor cortex (M2) are about equally dense
to AM/AV, and similarly topographically organized as
those from AC. Prefrontal fibers (from all areas) to AM/
AV predominantly arise from layer 6 cells; considerably
fewer from layer 5 cells (Shibata and Naito, 2005; Petrof
and Sherman, 2009). Even though PFC cells projecting
to AM or to AV are largely intermingled, very few cortical neurons (about 1%) distribute, via collaterals, to both
AM and AV (Wright et al., 2013). Unlike AM/AV, there
are only minor PFC (mPFC, AC and M2) projections to
the anterodorsal nucleus.
As has been well established, the anterior thalamus is
reciprocally connected with the retrosplenial cortex (RS)
(Shibata, 1993a, 1998; Hopkins, 2005). The retrosplenial
cortex consists of two major divisions, the granular (RSg)
and dysgranular (RSd) cortices, and the granular cortex
is further divided into a dorsal part b and a ventral part a
(Van Groen and Wyss, 1992a, 2003). RS fibers more heavily target AM and AV than AD (Van Groen and Wyss,
1990a, 1992a, 2003; Shibata, 1998; Hopkins, 2005). The
retrosplenial granular cortex (RSg) is the main source
of projections to AV, whereas both divisions distribute
fairly equally to AM (Wright et al., 2013). RSg fibers to AV
(and to AM) primarily originate dorsally in RSg—or in
part b (Van Groen and Wyss, 2003). Unlike the prefrontal
cortex (see above), there is an inverse topographic order
to RSd/g projections to AM/AV: rostral RSd/g fibers
terminate caudally in AM/AV and caudal RSd/g fibers

357

rostrally in AM/AV (Shibata, 1998). Similar to the PFC,
however, retrosplenial projections to AM and to AV arise
from separate populations of RSd/g cells—mainly of
layer 6 (Wright et al., 2013). Although AD strongly targets the retrosplenial cortex (Shibata 1993a; Van Groen
and Wyss, 1995), there are relatively weak return RS projections to AD, mainly originating from RSg (Shibata,
1998; Wright et al., 2010).
The subiculum as well as the pre- and parasubiculum
are also major sources of input to the anterior thalamus
(ATh). Subicular fibers to ATh mainly arise from the dorsal presubiculum (or postsubiculum), the dorsal subiculum (SUBd) and the intermediate subiculum (point
of convergence of the dorsal and ventral subiculum)
(Groenewegen, 1987), and secondarily from the ventral subiculum (SUBv), presubiculum and parasubiculum (Van Groen and Wyss, 1990b, 1990c; Wright et al.,
2010, 2013). AM and AV receive projections from similar
regions of the subiculum which differ from those distributing to AD. Afferents to AV and AM mainly originate
from the dorsal, intermediate, and ventral subiculum and
less so from the pre- and parasubiculum (Wright et al.
2010). By contrast, with the possible exception of the presubiculum, AD receives dense projections from all divisions of the subicular cortex, most prominently from the
dorsal presubiculum. Finally, subicular cells projecting to
ATh and to the mammillary bodies (MB) originate from
separate populations of neurons: from deep layers of the
subiculum to ATh and superficial layers to MB (Naber
and Witter, 1998; Ishizuka, 2001; Wright et al., 2010).
The mammillary bodies are the source of a pronounced and highly topographically organized set of
projections to the anterior thalamus (Seki and Zyo, 1984;
Hayakawa and Zyo, 1989; Shibata, 1992; Hopkins, 2005;
Wright et al., 2013). Proceeding medially to laterally in
MB, the medial division of the medial MB mainly distributes to AM, the lateral division of the medial MB
to AV, and the lateral mammillary nucleus to AD (for
review, Hopkins, 2005). Very few MB cells distribute, via
collaterals, to more than one anterior thalamic nucleus
(Wright et al., 2013).
Whereas AM and AV receive common sets of inputs,
distinct from those of the anterodorsal nucleus (see
above), AV and AD distribute to similar structures which
differ from those targeted by AM (Shibata, 1993a, 1993b;
Van Groen and Wyss, 1995; Van Groen et al., 1999; Hopkins, 2005; Shibata and Honda, 2012). All three anterior
thalamic nuclei, however, project to the retrosplenial
cortex (Shibata, 1993a; Odagiri et al., 2011). AM fibers
spread widely throughout the cortex, notably to anterior
as well as to posterior regions of cortex. Major targets are
the secondary motor, anterior cingulate, and retrosplenial cortices (all divisions), and secondarily, the ventral
orbital, perirhinal, medial and lateral entorhinal, and
secondary visual (area 18b) areas. AM sends few fibers

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

358

16. THALAMUS

to the subicular domain, mainly targeting the ventral
subiculum (proper). By contrast with AM, the cortical
projections of AD and AV are almost exclusively directed
to the retrosplenial cortex and to the subiculum—with
some additional fibers to the medial EC. With the exception of a minor AV projection to AC, there is an essential
lack of AV (or AD) projections to rostral regions of cortex. AV distributes to both divisions of the retrosplenial
cortex, but heavier to the granular cortex (RSg) (Odagiri
et al., 2011), whereas AD fibers appear confined to RSg.
Although AD and AV distribute to all parts of the subicular domain densities differ across regions. Specifically,
AD strongly targets the presubiculum and parasubiculum; by comparison, AV mainly projects to the ventral
subiculum (all layers) and weakly to the parasubiculum.

Functional Aspects
The anterior thalamus is intimately connected with
the hippocampus; that is, ATh receives direct as well
indirect (mainly from the mammillary bodies) projections from the hippocampus, and in turn projects
directly (to the subiculum) and indirectly (mainly via
the retrosplenial cortex) to the hippocampus. As such,
the anterior thalamus has been viewed as part of an
extended hippocampal circuitry subserving similar (or
nearly identical) types of functions as the hippocampus
(Gaffan, 1992; Aggleton and Brown, 1999, 2006; Aggleton et al., 2010). In humans, damage to the anterior thalamus produces profound memory deficits comparable to
those seen with hippocampal lesions, including severe
anterograde and graded retrograde amnesia. This socalled diencephalic amnesia has been linked to alterations of the mammillary bodies, the mammillothalamic
tract, and the anterior thalamus (Von Cramon et al., 1985;
Harding et al., 2000; Van der Werf et al., 2000, 2003; Gold
and Squire, 2006). Lesions of other nuclei of thalamus
in humans affect cognitive processing but essentially not
memory (Van der Werf et al., 2003).
The effects of anterior thalamic (ATh) lesions have
been extensively examined in rats and been shown to
disrupt “hippocampal-dependent” memories for both
spatial and non-spatial tasks (Byatt and DalrympleAlford, 1996; Sziklas and Petrides, 1999, 2007; Warburton
et al., 2001; Mair et al., 2003; Moran and DalrympleAlford, 2003; Wolff et al., 2008; Savage et al., 2011; Moreau
et al., 2013). By contrast, lesions of thalamic nuclei adjacent to ATh, such as the mediodorsal or intralaminar
nuclei, fail to disrupt performance on spatial memory
tasks (Mitchell and Dalrymple-Alford, 2006; Wolff et al.,
2008; Moreau et al., 2013). For example, Mitchell and
Dalrymple-Alford (2006) described a double dissociation between the effects of ATh and intralaminar lesions
such that only ATh lesions altered performance on spatial memory tasks, while intralaminar lesions produced

impairments on a non-hippocampal-dependent egocentric working memory task.
Based in part on hippocampal output to ATh, it was
originally thought that the ATh involvement in memory
largely resulted from the effects of the hippocampus on
the anterior thalamus (Gaffan, 1992; Aggleton and Brown,
1999). In this “hippocampal-centric” view, hippocampaloriginating memories (or traces) were transferred from
the hippocampus to the ATh (and to other subcortical
structures) and the downstream sites (merely) passively
responded to the information received from the hippocampus (Savage et al., 2011). This notion, however, has
gradually been modified in large measure by the demonstration that ascending (brainstem/diencephalic) systems can exert marked effects on memory, independent
of the influence of the hippocampus. In this regard, a key
finding was that destruction of a branch of the post-commissural fornix that selectively innervates the mammillary bodies produced very slight (or no) effects on tests
of spatial memory (Vann et al., 2011). By comparison,
performance on these same tasks was severely altered
following lesions of the mammillary bodies or the mammillothalamic tract (Sziklas and Petrides, 1993; Vann and
Aggleton, 2003). These findings at least partially ruled
out the actions of the hippocampus on the mammillary
bodies on these tasks, and further pointed to a direct role
for MB in spatial memory processing. Regarding possible “non-hippocampal” actions on MB in memory, the
mammillary bodies are strongly reciprocally connected
with the ventral tegmental nuclei (VTg) (of Gudden) of
the brainstem, and ventral tegmental lesions have been
shown to disrupt performance on various spatial learning tasks including delayed match to place in the water
maze, T-maze alternation, and working memory tasks
on the radial arm maze (Vann, 2009, 2010).
The hippocampus, anterior thalamus, mammillary
bodies, and Gudden’s tegmental nuclei constitute key
elements of interconnected circuitry which in basic form
was originally described by Papez’s (Papez’s circuit,
1937). More recently this system of connections has been
shown to be organized as two parallel but segregated
anatomical and functional networks—medial and lateral systems (Fig. 4) (Vann and Aggleton, 2004; Vertes
et al., 2004; Aggleton et al., 2010). The medial system is
comprised of the ventral tegmental nucleus (VTg), the
medial MB, the anteroventral nucleus of thalamus, and
the subiculum/retrosplenial cortex; the lateral system
consists of the dorsal tegmental nucleus, lateral MB, the
anterodorsal nucleus of thalamus, and the pre, para and
postsubiculum (Fig. 4) (Vann and Aggleton, 2004; Vertes
et al., 2004; Aggleton et al., 2010).
Functionally, the medial system has been identified a
“theta system” or one in which cells of each structure fire
rhythmically synchronous with the hippocampal theta
rhythm (Kocsis and Vertes, 1994, 1997; Bland et al., 1995;

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

359

Anterior Nuclei

FIGURE 4  Schematic representation of the

7KDODPXV
$QWHULRU PHGLDO
DQG DQWHULRU
YHQWUDO QXFOHL

$QWHULRU GRUVDO
QXFOHXV

0HGLDO PDPPLOODU\ QXFOHXV

/DWHUDO PDPPLOODU\ QXFOHXV

main nuclei and their interconnections associated with the medial mammillary theta system
and the lateral mammillary head direction
system. See text for further details. From Vann,
S.D., & Aggleton, J.P. (2004). The mammillary bodies: two memory systems in one? Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 5, 35–44.

6HSWXP
6XSUDPDPPLOODU\ QXFOHL
7XEHURPDPPLOODU\QXFOHL

6XELFXOXP

0HGLDO
HQWRUKLQDO
FRUWH[

+LSSRFDPSDO IRUPDWLRQ

9HQWUDO
WHJPHQWDO
QXFOHXV

3UHVXELFXOXP
3RVWVXELFXOXP
3DUDVXELFXOXP

'RUVDO
WHJPHQWDO
QXFOHXV

*XGGHQ
V WHJPHQWDO QXFOHL

+LSSRFDPSDO IRUPDWLRQ

Kirk et al., 1996; Bassant and Poindessous-Jazat, 2001;
Kocsis et al., 2001; Vertes et al., 2001; Albo et al. 2003, 2011;
Talk et al., 2004; Tsanov et al., 2011a, 2011b). For example,
all cells of VTg were found to discharge rhythmically in
bursts with theta, whereas 75% of those of AV were identified as “theta-rhythmic” neurons (Kocsis et al., 2001;
Vertes et al., 2001; Albo et al., 2003, 2011). The lateral system, on the other hand, consists of a well-defined head
direction (HD) network—meaning that cells of structures
comprising this system discharge selectively when a rat
(or rat’s head) is facing or oriented in a particular direction irrespective of a rat’s location in its environment
(Taube, 1995, 1998; Wiener and Taube, 2005). Lesions at
each stage/nucleus of this ascending system disrupt HD
activity at successive rostral stages demonstrating the
importance of information transfer from lower to higher
levels of the brain in the HD system (Bassett and Taube,
2005; Wiener and Taube, 2005).
While not fully resolved, it appears that these two
apparently dissimilar systems (theta and HD) may serve
complementary roles as their functions become integrated at successive rostral levels of the brain (Vertes
et al. 2004; Aggleton et al., 2010). In particular, it has been
proposed that theta rhythmic activity (of the medial
system) may promote and enhance the transfer of HD
signals through the HD circuitry (Albo et al., 2003, 2011;
Vertes et al., 2004). This may involve the unique properties of bursting neurons—or the theta bursting cells
of the medial system. As described by Lisman (1997),
burst discharges, relative to single spikes, represent a
much more effective (or reliable) mode of communication between neurons. As was pointed out, there is a
low probability that single presynaptic spikes can generate action potentials in postsynaptic cells (unreliable

synapses), compared to a high probability that presynaptic bursts would drive postsynaptic neurons (reliable
synapses). This “special” quality of bursting neurons
has been well documented in several systems of the
brain including the thalamus (Guido and Weyand, 1995;
Fanselow et al., 2001; Swadlow and Gusev, 2001). For
example, ventrobasal thalamic neurons were shown
to exert considerably stronger postsynaptic actions on
cells of the somatosensory cortex when firing in bursts
than tonically (Swadlow and Gusev, 2001). In an analogous manner, the theta burst firing of AV neurons could
enhance the activity of target cells of the subiculum or
retrosplenial cortex to thereby increase their responsiveness to other inputs, such as from HD cells of the
anterodorsal thalamus—thus magnifying the influence
of anterodorsal HD cells on subicular/retrosplenial neurons. It would appear that directional information is very
critical for a rat (and other species) when engaged in
locomotor/exploratory behaviors (theta states) and less
so during non-locomotor activities such as grooming or
consumatory acts (non-theta states) (Vertes and Kocsis,
1997; Vertes, 2005). Accordingly, theta burst firing may
represent an important signal involved in the differential
processing of HD activity under the two conditions (e.g.,
locomotion or grooming); that is, essentially only when
HD activity is coupled with theta-rhythmic discharge is
head direction information processed and used to guide
spatial behaviors.
Whereas there is an almost complete segregation of
theta and HD signals at lower levels of the brain (tegmental nuclei and MB), the two systems appear to
converge at thalamocortical levels—with likely important functional consequences. In studies examining the
discharge properties of AV neurons in behaving rats,

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

360

16. THALAMUS

Aggleton and colleagues (Tsanov et al., 2011a, 2011b)
showed that 25–30% of AV neurons were “theta” cells,
and about one-third of these, mainly of the medial AV,
also exhibited directional properties. Specifically, these
cells fired rhythmically (theta) and also responded to
changes in head position and were thus termed “directionally modulated theta cells” Another population of
AV neurons was identified as head direction cells and
a subset of them (about 40%) showed theta rhythmicity,
most evident when the rat was facing or heading in the
preferred direction—or “head direction-by-theta cells.”
In effect, these findings strongly point to an integration
of theta and directional signals within the anterior thalamus. The theta modulation of HD activity was proposed
to represent “an oscillatory enhancement of the HD signal” (Tsanov et al., 2011b).
Comparable to the integration of theta and HD signals
at the thalamus, a class of neurons of the presubiculum
and parasubiculum have been identified which code for
location (place) and direction (HD) and are also theta
modulated—theta modulated place by direction (TPD)
neurons (Cacucci et al., 2004). It was suggested that the
likely source of theta rhythmicity to TPD cells was AV of
the thalamus. In summary, the foregoing would indicate
that the anterior thalamus is a vital hub in a hierarchically arranged system of connections serving a critical
role in spatial navigation and hence in spatial learning/
memory in rats.

LATERAL NUCLEI
The lateral thalamic complex consists of two structures, the laterodorsal (LD) and lateral posterior (LP)
nuclei. The two nuclei constitute a large part of the dorsal surface of the thalamus, lateral to the habenular complex and, caudally, medial to the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus (DLG). The LD stretches from the caudal part of
the anterior thalamic complex to the rostral pole of DLG.
The lateral posterior nucleus starts at mid-thalamic levels between the habenular complex, medially and the
laterodorsal nucleus, laterally, and in the posterior direction, LP gradually replaces LD. Caudally, the lateral posterior nucleus is situated medial to DLG and in its most
posterior extent, dorsal to the medial geniculate nuclei
(Paxinos and Watson, 2014). In Nissl stained sections, the
lateral nuclei appear rather homogeneous, but both LD
and LP can be subdivided into several subnuclei, based
on cytoarchitectonics and distinct patterns of connectivity with the cortex. These subdivisions can be recognized
in acetylcholinesterase-stained sections showing some
differences in staining intensity in the various subnuclei (Takahashi, 1985; Paxinos and Watson, 2014). Acetylcholinesterase activity in the lateral posterior nucleus
is higher than that in the laterodorsal nucleus in which

there is only moderate activity. While not throughout,
the calcium-binding proteins, calretinin and calbindin
D28K, are present in neurons in certain parts of LD and
LP, while parvalbumin and the other two calcium binding proteins are present in fibers of both nuclei (Arai
et al., 1994; Paxinos et al., 1999).

Afferent and Efferent Projections
Similar to the anterior thalamic nuclei, LD is strongly
related to the retrosplenial cortex (Van Groen and Wyss,
1990a, 1992a; Shibata, 2000). The projections from different parts of the retrosplenial cortex, originating predominantly from layer 6, but also layer 5, distribute in
a topographical manner to the various subnuclei of LD
(Fig. 5) (Shibata, 2000; Shinkai et al., 2005). Thus, a rostral-to-caudal axis in the retrosplenial cortex (area 29c–
29a) corresponds to a ventromedial-to-dorsolateral axis
of LD. In addition, cortical inputs to LD originate from
visual areas 17 and 18, the presubiculum, entorhinal cortex, and the posterior parietal cortex (Thompson and
Robertson, 1987a, 1987b; Reep et al., 1994; Shibata, 1996;
Shinkai et al., 2005; Wright et al., 2010). Prefrontal projections to LD mainly arise from the anterior cingulate
(AC) and medial agranular (AGm) cortices (Sukekawa,
1988; Vertes, 2002; Shibata and Naito, 2005). AC distributes to dorsal and ventral medial parts of the medial LD,
while AGm projects to lateral parts of this division of LD
(Shibata and Naito, 2005).
Subcortical inputs to LD arise from the thalamic
reticular nucleus, pretectal nuclei, intermediate layers
of the superior colliculus, the ventral lateral geniculate
nucleus, and trigeminal nuclei (Thompson and Robertson, 1987b; Coleman and Mitrofanis, 1996; Kolmac et al.,
2000; Bezdudnaya and Keller, 2008). The efferent projections of LD reach various limbic and visual cortical
areas, including the anterior cingulate, retrosplenial and
entorhinal cortices and the subiculum. These projections
are topographically organized and originate from different subnuclei of the laterodorsal nucleus (Van Groen and
Wyss, 1992b; Shires et al., 2013). LD also sends projections to the striatum (Cheatwood et al., 2003; Kamishina
et al., 2008).
The lateral posterior (LP) nucleus is reciprocally connected with a number of sensory and motor cortices, and
to a lesser extent with “limbic” cortices. They include the
medial agranular, anterior cingulate, occipital, posterior
parietal, and temporal association cortices (Vaudano
et al., 1991; Reep et al., 1994; Coleman and Mitrofanis,
1996; Shi and Cassell, 1997; Kolmac et al., 2000; Shibata,
2000; Conte et al., 2008; Kamishina et al., 2009). These
connections are highly topographically organized. For
instance, the rostral ventromedial division of LP projects
substantially to the medial agranular cortex, to the dorsomedial AC and to rostral aspects of the retrosplenial

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

361

Lateral Nuclei

FIGURE 5  Pattern of projections of the
retrosplenial cortex to the rat laterodorsal
nucleus of thalamus. (A–C) Schematic representation of three rostrocaudally aligned
transverse sections through the thalamus
showing the site of injection of the retrograde tracer, cholera toxin B (shaded area)
in the laterodorsal nucleus (LD) of thalamus. (D–F) Schematic representation of
three rostrocaudally aligned transverse sections through the retrosplenial cortex showing the distribution of retrogradely labeled
cells (dots) in the retrosplenial cortex following the injection in LD. (G) Sagittal section
showing the anterior-posterior locations of
the transverse sections of D–F. Note the pronounced numbers of retrogradely labeled
neurons, mainly in layer 6 and to a lesser
extent in layer 5, throughout the entire retrosplenial cortex (29a–29d) following the
LD injection. From Shibata, H. (2000). Organization of the retrosplenial cortical projections
to the laterodorsal thalamic nucleus in the rat.
Neuroscience Research 38, 303–311.

cortex (Kamishina et al., 2009). In addition to the cortex,
LP also distributes to the dorsal striatum and in a highly
topographical manner (Erro et al., 2002; Cheatwood et al.,
2003, 2005; Kamishina et al., 2008). Specifically, fibers of
the rostromedial part of medial LP project to the central
region of the dorsocentral striatum, whereas those of the
central part of medial LP target the dorsal sector of the
dorsocentral striatum (Kamishina et al., 2008). The LP
receives dense projections from the temporal area Te2,
an auditory and visual association area, but not from
areas Te1 and Te3 (Shi and Cassell, 1997). Visual input
to LP originates from both the primary visual cortex and
the superior colliculus (Takahashi, 1985; Masterson et al.,
2009). Afferents from the primary visual cortex to LP
mostly consist of collaterals of neurons in layer 5 that
project to the brainstem (Bourassa and Deschênes, 1995).
Tectal projections to LP include substance P containing
cells targeting the lateral division of LP (Paul and Cox,
2010).

Functional Aspects
The laterodorsal and lateral posterior nuclei are considered “association” thalamic nuclei in that they do
not receive direct motor or sensory inputs. However, a
recent finding indicates that LD receives inputs from trigeminal nuclei relaying somatosensory information of

the vibrissae (Bezdudnaya and Keller, 2008). In addition,
LP and LD receive pronounced projections from cortical
sensory, motor association, and limbic cortices. Based on
strong relationships with cortical and subcortical visual
structures, LP is often considered the visual association
thalamus—much like the pulvinar of cats and primates
(Jones, 1985, 2007). In humans and primates, damage to
the pulvinar (i.e., lateral posterior nucleus) appears to
produce spatial hemi-neglect, or the inability to attend
or respond to sensory stimuli in the contralateral receptive field (see Reep and Corwin, 2009). In rats, LP has
reciprocal and topographically organized connections
with the dorsocentral striatum and with the posterior
parietal and frontal cortices, including the medial agranular cortex. Damage to this network produces deficits
in attention including multisensory neglect. LP appears
positioned to serve a pivotal role in both visual and spatial attention (Burcham et al., 1997; Reep et al., 2004; Reep
and Corwin, 2009).
In view of similarities in patterns of connections,
the laterodorsal nucleus is strongly associated with the
anterior thalamic complex and the head direction (HD)
network (Taube, 2007). Similar to the anterior thalamus
and postsubiculum, HD cells have been identified in
LD (Mizumori and Williams, 1993). Additionally, LD is
intimately tied to structures of the HD network, including the retrosplenial cortex and dorsal presubiculum.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

362

16. THALAMUS

However, the role of LD in head orientation, and thus
in spatial navigation, appears to be different from that of
the anterior thalamic nuclei and the pre- and parasubiculum. Lesions of the anterior thalamus in rats disrupt HD
cell firing in the dorsal presubiculum and produce significant impairments in spatial navigation and mnemonic
functions (Byatt and Dalrymple-Alford, 1996; Goodridge
and Taube 1997; Mitchell and Dalrymple-Alford, 2006).
By contrast, lesions of LD have no effect on HD cell firing in the dorsal presubiculum (Golob et al., 1998). However, lesion and inactivation studies involving LD clearly
demonstrate a role for the nucleus in spatial learning
and memory. Disruption of LD produces impairments
in spatial maze tasks (Mizumori et al., 1994; Van Groen
et al., 2002), and these impairments are significantly augmented when lesions include both LD and the anterior
thalamus (Wilton et al., 2001; Van Groen et al., 2002). LD
may provide somatosensory-linked spatial information
to the head direction network (Bezdudnaya and Keller,
2008).

INTRALAMINAR NUCLEI
The intralaminar nuclei of thalamus form a conspicuous collection of nuclei in the medial and dorsal part of
the thalamic complex. The intralaminar thalamic nuclei
(ILt) are located lateral to the mediodorsal nucleus and
“embedded” within the internal medullary lamina.
Several nuclei of the intralaminar complex have high
activity for acetylcholinesterase (Paxinos and Watson,
2014). The intralaminar nuclei are made up of a rostral
group, consisting of the central medial (CM), paracentral (PC), and central lateral (CL) nuclei. The caudal
group is composed of the parafascicular–center median
complex, which in rats consists of a single nuclear mass,
hereafter referred to as the parafascicular (PF) nucleus.
In addition, in the caudal one-third of the thalamus, the
subparafascicular and PIL are considered part of the
posterior intralaminar complex (see also the MGN section). In Nissl-stained sections, most of the intralaminar
nuclei can be easily identified based on neuronal packing which is denser than that of adjacent thalamic nuclei
(Paxinos and Watson, 2014).
The central medial nucleus can be clearly recognized
as a centrally located group of large, deeply staining,
flattened cells distinct from midline nuclei lying dorsal
and ventral to it. Laterally, CM is continuous with the
paracentral nucleus on both sides. In rats, the left and
right sides of CM fuse to form a single, centrally positioned nucleus. The paracentral nucleus is a thin strip of
cells that is continuous with CM, medially and with the
central lateral nucleus, laterally. PC cells are difficult to
distinguish from those of the CL, but appear more flattened. The paracentral nucleus lies in the anterior and

middle portion of the internal medullary lamina, intercalated between MD and the ventral nuclei of thalamus.
In the caudal PC, a distinct oval subnucleus can be recognized, the oval paracentral nucleus. The central lateral
nucleus is the most dorsal component of the intralaminar nuclei, located posterior and dorsal to PC, and continuous with it. The CL is larger than PC but these nuclei
share many connectional properties. Therefore, the central lateral and paracentral nuclei are often regarded as
a single structure.
The parafascicular nucleus is a caudal component of
the intralaminar complex. The PF stands out as a darkly
staining nucleus, surrounding the fasciculus retroflexus.
The lateral, larger part of the rat parafascicular nucleus,
containing darker staining neurons than the medial
part, is considered the equivalent of the primate center median nucleus, whereas the medial part of PF is
homologous to the parafascicular nucleus (Jones, 1985,
2007). Ventrally, PF lies adjacent to the mesencephalon;
dorsally it is bordered by CL and the habenular complex. The parafascicular nucleus lies lateral to the rostral
extent of the periventricular gray matter. The subparafascicular nucleus (SPF) is a flat, horizontally oriented
nucleus which stretches from just ventral to the parafascicular nucleus, rostromedially, and toward the posterior
intralaminar and peripeduncular nucleus, caudolaterally. Neurons in the SPF have a horizontal orientation.
Medially, the subparafascicular nucleus lies just dorsal
to the medial lemniscus. SPF consists of a medial magnocellular part and a lateral parvocellular part (Faull and
Mehler, 1985; LeDoux et al., 1987; Coolen et al., 2003a).
The principal neurotransmitters used by the intralaminar nuclei are excitatory amino acids (Hur and
Zaborszky, 2005). Neurons containing calcium-binding
proteins sparsely populate the intralaminar nuclei (Arai
et al., 1994; Coolen et al., 2003a). Enkephalinergic neurons, as indicated by the presence of preproenkephalin
mRNA, are present in CM and CL but to a much lesser
extent in the paracentral and parafascicular nuclei
(Hermanson et al., 1995).

Afferent Projections
Main sources of input to the rostral intralaminar
nuclei (CM, PC and CL) are subcortical structures, particularly of the brainstem and spinal cord. The following
subcortical structures project to some or all nuclei of the
rostral intralaminar complex: the mesencephalic, pontine, and medullary reticular formation, the serotonergic
dorsal raphe, median raphe and raphe magnus, the cholinergic pedunculopontine (PPT) and laterodorsal tegmental (LDT) nuclei, the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi,
the spinal trigeminal nucleus, the medial and lateral vestibular nuclei, several subnuclei of the parabrachial complex, the locus coeruleus, the nucleus incertus, distinct

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Intralaminar Nuclei

regions of the periaqueductal gray, deep layers of the
superior colliculus, the nucleus of Darkschewitsch, and
the pars reticulata and pars compacta of the substantia
nigra (Peschanski and Besson, 1984; Jones and Yang,
1985; Vertes et al., 1986, 1999, 2010; Yamasaki et al., 1986;
Hallanger et al., 1987; Vertes and Martin, 1988;
Vertes, 1991; Villanueva et al., 1998; Bester et al., 1999;
Groenewegen et al., 1999; Shiroyama et al., 1999; Goto
et al., 2001; Krout et al., 2001; Olucha-Bordonau et al.,
2003). Using small injections of retrograde tracers in CM,
PC, or CL, Loewy and colleagues (Krout and Loewy,
2000a, 2000b; Krout et al., 2001, 2002) showed that each
nucleus receives a different combination of inputs from
various brainstem nuclei, as well as from subregions of
these nuclei, suggesting a certain degree of specificity
for the rostral intralaminar nuclei. In addition, the rostral intralaminar nuclei receive input from deep cerebellar nuclei, the supramammillary nucleus, zona incerta,
and the reticular thalamic nucleus (Haroian et al., 1981;
Vertes, 1992; Kolmac and Mitrofanis, 1997; Power et al.,
1999; Power and Mitrofanis, 2001).
While cortical afferents to the intralaminar complex
have not been examined per se, evidence gained from
descriptions of cortical projections to thalamus shows
that the PFC (or the mPFC) is a principal source of input
to the rostral intralaminar nuclei (Reep et al., 1987; Sesack
et al., 1989; Jasmin et al., 2004; Vertes, 2002, 2004; Hoover
and Vertes, 2011). Regarding the mPFC, ventral (or limbic) regions of the mPFC (i.e., IL, PL and AC) distribute
strongly to CM but minimally to PC and CL, whereas
the dorsally located AGm (or secondary motor cortex)
exhibits the reverse pattern: pronounced projections to
PC and CL and weak ones to CM (Vertes, 2002, 2004).
By comparison, the orbital and insular cortices distribute moderately to the rostral intralaminar complex (ILt),
with heaviest projections from the medial orbital (MO)
cortex to CM (Shi and Cassell, 1998a; Jasmin et al., 2004;
Hoover and Vertes, 2011).
Subcortical inputs to the parafascicular nucleus are
comparable to those to the rostral intralaminar nuclei
(Haroian et al., 1981; Cornwall and Phillipson, 1988; Lai
et al., 2000; Krout et al., 2002; Van der Werf et al., 2002).
The lateral parafascicular nucleus receives relatively
strong inputs from sensorimotor-related nuclei, such as
the vestibular nuclei, spinal trigeminal complex, superior colliculus, substantia nigra-pars reticulata, and the
entopeduncular nucleus (Shiroyama et al., 1999; Gonzalo
et al., 2002; Krout et al., 2002). The medial PF, on the other
hand, primarily receives autonomic and visceral-related
afferents, foremost among them, from the solitary
nucleus, periaqueductal gray, and the parabrachial complex (Bester et al., 1999; Krout et al., 2000a, 2000b, 2002).
As indicated, the subparafascicular nucleus (SPF) can be
divided into a medial and a lateral part (Coolen et al.,
2003a) with each receiving a different set of afferents

363

(Coolen et al., 2003b). Thus, the medial SPF, characterized by galanin-immunoreactive fibers, receives inputs
from lumbar spinothalamic neurons and visceral-related
brainstem and forebrain regions. In contrast, the lateral
SPF, containing calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)immunoreactive neurons and fibers, receives inputs
from auditory- as well as visual-related brainstem and
forebrain regions (LeDoux et al., 1987; Coolen et al.,
2003b). The lateral subparafascicular nucleus is strongly
related to the auditory thalamus, including the posterior
intralaminar and medial geniculate nuclei.

Efferent Projections
The principal targets of the intralaminar nuclei are
regions of the cortex and the dorsal striatum, with additional projections to the ventral striatum and to the
amygdala. In general, fibers of the lateral (PC, CL) and
caudal (PF) intralaminar nuclei innervate sensorimotor
regions of the cortex and the dorsal striatum, whereas
those of the central medial nucleus distribute over a
much wider region of the forebrain to both limbic and
non-limbic sites (Berendse and Groenewegen, 1990,
1991; Condé et al., 1990, 1995; Su and Bentivoglio, 1990;
Hicks and Huerta, 1991; Turner and Herkenham, 1991;
Brog et al., 1993; Reep and Corwin, 1999; Erro et al., 2002;
Van der Werf et al., 2002; Jasmin et al., 2004; Wang and
Shyu, 2004; Hoover and Vertes, 2007; Vertes et al., 2012).
In this regard, the projections of CM more closely parallel those of midline thalamic nuclei (see below) than
those of other intralaminar nuclei. Accordingly, the efferents of PC, CL and PF will be described as a group followed by a description of CM projections.
With some overlap, there is a medial to lateral gradient
in the projections of PC/CL/PF to the dorsal PFC such
that PC mainly targets the anterior cingulate (AC) cortex,
CL the laterally adjacent secondary motor cortex (AGm),
and PF the primary motor cortex (AG1) (Berendse and
Groenewegen, 1991; Condé et al., 1995; Reep and Corwin, 1999; Hoover and Vertes, 2007). More specifically,
PC distributes primarily to the dorsal and ventral AC,
and secondarily to AGm and to the caudally bordering retrosplenial (RS) cortex—with minimal projections
to other cortical regions. CL mainly targets AGm, with
additional projections to AGl, the primary and secondary somatosensory cortices, the retrosplenial cortex, and
to occipital cortices. PF distributes almost exclusively to
sensorimotor cortices, substantially to AGl, and less so to
somatosensory cortices.
Similar to the output to the cortex, PC/CL/PF fibers
project to separate but overlapping regions of the dorsal striatum but as a group encompass a wide expanse
of the caudate-putamen (C-P). The rostral PC and the
CL distribute to the dorsomedial and dorsolateral striatum, respectively, and hence as a pair, cover the entire

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

364

16. THALAMUS

dorsal half of the striatum. PF fibers, on the other hand,
terminate within a mid-dorsoventral zone of the lateral
striatum, virtually throughout C-P. Although these intralaminar nuclei distribute to nucleus accumbens (ACC),
projections are modest and selectively target the lateral
core of ACC, with strongest projections from PC and
medial PF to accumbens (Berendse and Groenewegen,
1990, 1991; Brog et al., 1993; Erro et al., 2002).
As demonstrated by Groenewegen and colleagues
(Groenewegen et al., 1999; Groenewegen and Witter,
2004), thalamocortical/thalamostriatal connections are
highly topographically organized such the projections
of individual thalamic nuclei reach specific regions of
the cortex and the striatum which are, in turn, linked via
corticostriatal projections. For instance, CL quite selectively targets the medial agranular cortex (AGm) and the
dorsolateral quadrant of C-P, and AGm, in turn, distributes dorsolaterally in C-P (Berendse and Groenewegen,
1990, 1991; Wu et al., 2009). As a result, CL is positioned
to directly affect AGm as well as its target zone in the
striatum. This appears to be a general pattern of organization of midline/intralaminar thalamo-corticostriatal
systems.
Moreover, on the basis of single-cell tracing, Deschênes
et al. (1996) showed that striatal and cortical projections
from some caudal intralaminar nuclei arise from collaterals of the same neuron (see also Bubser and Deutch,
1998; Otake and Namura, 1998).
While, as indicated, the projections of the central
medial nucleus differ from those of other intralaminar
nuclei, similar to these nuclei, the main output of CM
is to the cortex and to the dorsal striatum. By contrast
with them, however, CM fibers distribute over much
more extensive regions of both the cortex and striatum,
and also terminate substantially in the ventral striatum
(Fig. 6) (Van der Werf et al., 2002; Vertes et al., 2012).
Primary CM targets are anterior and posterior
regions of cortex, the claustrum, the caudate-putamen,
the nucleus accumbens, the olfactory tubercle, and the
amygdala. There are distinct differences in projections
from the rostral and caudal CM (Fig. 6) (Vertes et al.,
2012). The cortical projection of the rostral CM is virtually restricted to anterior regions of cortex, with fibers
distributing to the AGm, AC, prelimbic, dorsolateral
orbital, and dorsal agranular insular cortices. By contrast,
the caudal CM mainly targets lateral and caudal structures of the cortex: the lateral and dorsolateral orbital
cortices, dorsal and ventral agranular insular cortices,
the gustatory/visceral cortex, primary somatosensory
and motor cortices, and the perirhinal cortex. Subcortically, rostral CM distributes rostrocaudally throughout
C-P, to the anterior core and shell of nucleus accumbens,
and throughout the basal lateral nucleus (BLA) of amygdala. Caudal CM fibers, on the other hand, innervate
lateral/ventrolateral regions of C-P and several nuclei

&RUWH[
PHGLDO
$&
$*P
3/
,/
56&
ODWHUDO
$*O
/2

)LEHU'HQVLW\
OLJKW
PRGHUDWH
KHDY\

9/2
'/2
$,G
$,S
*8
&0U

66,
66,,

&0F

35&
(&7
(&
%DVDO)RUHEUDLQ
$&&
&/$
&3
27
$P\JGDOD
$$$
%/$
%0$
/$
&($
&2$D

FIGURE 6  Summary diagram showing the pattern of projections
of the rostral (CMr) and caudal (CMc) central medial nucleus of the
thalamus to structures of the cortex (medial and lateral regions), the
basal forebrain, and the amygdala. The relative density of projections
to each structure is indicated by the thickness of the lines. See text for
further details. From Vertes, R.P., Hoover, W.B., & Rodriguez, J.J. (2012).
Projections of the central medial nucleus of the thalamus in the rat: node in
cortical, striatal and limbic forebrain circuitry. Neuroscience 219, 120–136.

of the amygdala including the anterior, lateral, central,
medial, cortical, and basal nuclei. With the exception
of nucleus accumbens, which receives input essentially
only from the rostral CM, the rostral and caudal CM
target the same structures but different parts of them.
When outputs are combined, however, CM distributes

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

365

Midline Nuclei

very widely over the cortex, to the entire dorsal striatum,
to the anterior accumbens, and to most subnuclei of the
amygdala (Vertes et al., 2012).

Functional Aspects
Owing to the relatively small size of individual intralaminar nuclei, the complex configuration of these nuclei
as a whole, and the intricate relationships of these nuclei
to neighboring thalamic groups, it has been difficult to
probe separate functions for each of the intralaminar
nuclei. As such, when describing function, these nuclei
are generally combined, and in some cases, the lateral
MD is also included (Bailey and Mair, 2005; Mitchell
and Dalrymple-Alford, 2005, 2006; Lopez et al., 2009). As
discussed, damage to the anterior thalamus (ATh) gives
rise to deficits in (allocentric) spatial learning/memory
which mimic those produced by lesions of the hippocampus. This is consistent with the strong anatomical
links between these structures. Whereas the intralaminar nuclei lie caudally adjacent to the anterior thalamus,
intralaminar projections significantly differ from those
of the ATh. Specifically, ILt nuclei mainly target the striatum and dorsal/dorsolateral (motor) regions of cortex as
opposed to hippocampal-related systems for the anterior nuclei. Based in part, however, on their close proximity to ATh, the functions of the intralaminar nuclei
have often been compared to those of the anterior thalamus. Specifically, Mitchell and Dalrymple-Alford (2005)
initially showed that ATh, but not intralaminar, lesions
produced deficits on a spatial radial arm maze (RAM)
task in rats. In a follow-up report, they described a double dissociation between the effects of lesions of the two
thalamic regions; that is, only ATh lesions disrupted performance on the RAM task, whereas intralaminar lesions
produced impairments on a non-hippocampal-dependent (egocentric) working memory task (Mitchell and
Dalrymple-Alford, 2006). Consistent with this, Bailey
and Mair (2005) demonstrated that intralaminar lesions
produced essentially no impairments on a delayed nonmatching to sample RAM task which is sensitive to anterior thalamic or hippocampal damage (Mair et al., 2003).
More recently, Hembrook and Mair (2011) compared
the effects of intralaminar thalamic (ILt) lesions with
those of the reuniens (RE) and rhomboid (RH) nuclei of
the midline thalamus on a “win-shift” task (or a delayed
non-match to sample RAM task), which is reportedly
sensitive to both hippocampal and PFC damage, and on
a visuospatial reaction time (VSRT) task used to evaluate
lesions of the striatum and the dorsal frontal cortex (Burk
and Mair, 2001; Mair et al., 2002; Bailey and Mair, 2004).
The effects of lesions of the two thalamic sites were doubly dissociated: RE/RH lesions disrupted performance
on the win-shift task but not the VSRT task, while caudal
intralaminar lesions altered behavior on the VSRT task

but not on the win-shift task. Although as described,
intralaminar lesions do not generally affect performance
on spatial memory tasks, Cassel and colleagues (Lopez
et al., 2009) demonstrated some long-term effects of rostral ILt lesions on a (spatial) water maze task. Rats with
intralaminar lesions showed no deficits on acquisition or
on retention using a probe test 5 days post-acquisition,
but were significantly impaired when tested 25 days
post-acquisition, illustrating a loss of remote spatial
memory.

MIDLINE NUCLEI
The midline nuclei are located medially in the thalamus as a relatively narrow band of nuclei that are distributed over the entire dorsal-to-ventral extent of the
thalamus. The midline nuclei include the paraventricular, paratenial, reuniens, and rhomboid nuclei—and in
some schemes, the IMD, which lies medially between
the two halves of MD (Groenewegen and Witter, 2004).
These nuclei occupy the midline of the thalamus from its
very rostral tip to approximately two-thirds of the rostrocaudal length of the thalamus. The paraventricular
nucleus (PV) is located medially, spanning the entire rostrocaudal length of the midline complex. PV lies directly
ventral to the third ventricle, and dorsal and medial to
the mediodorsal nucleus. Rostrally, it follows the surface
of the massa intermedia and curves ventrally to form a
wedge between the anterior poles of nucleus reuniens
(RE) (Krieg, 1944). More caudally, PV curves slightly
lateral, ventral to the habenula, and ends just rostral to
the posterior commissure. The paratenial nucleus (PT)
forms a slender, elongated nucleus located in the anterior part of the thalamus in close proximity and lateral
to the paraventricular nucleus. At its posterior end, PT
fuses with the mediodorsal nucleus. The PT, together
with the mediodorsal and reuniens nuclei, are thought
to originate from a common nuclear mass. The rhomboid
nucleus (RH) is located ventral to the internal medullary
lamina (Berendse and Groenewegen, 1990). At its rostral
end, it merges with the anteromedial nucleus and has
wing-like lateral extensions. The nucleus is easily distinguished by its conspicuous shape and its large and
darkly staining cells.
The nucleus reuniens (RE) is located in the anterior twothirds of the thalamus. Rostrally, it is divided into a left
and a right component by the third ventricle; further caudally the two structures fuse and become a mass of cells
on the midline of the thalamus, lying immediately dorsal
to the third ventricle. The RE consists of a conglomerate of
loosely packed cells (Jones, 1985, 2007; Risold et al., 1997).
The main mass of RE is bordered bilaterally by the perireuniens nucleus (or lateral wings of RE). The intermediodorsal nucleus (IMD) is located posteriorly, between the

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

366

16. THALAMUS

left and right mediodorsal nuclei. An IMD is not recognized in all species, but has been defined in the rat (Jones,
1985; Berendse and Groenewegen, 1990). The midline
nuclei use excitatory amino acids as a neurotransmitter
(Hur and Zaborszky, 2005). In addition, calcium-binding
proteins are present in both cell bodies and neuropil. Calretinin-positive neurons are present virtually throughout
the midline nuclei, with a preference for PV and RE (Arai
et al., 1994; Paxinos et al., 1999). Calbindin-positive neurons are predominantly located in the reuniens and intermediodorsal nuclei. Parvalbumin is conspicuously absent
from the midline nuclei (Arai et al., 1994). The neuropil of
PV is very rich in neurotransmitters and neuropeptides,
most of which are contained in afferent fibers. In addition,
a subpopulation of PV neurons expresses preproenkephalin mRNA (Hermanson et al., 1995).

Afferent Projections
The PV receives afferents from a wide array of cortical and subcortical sites (Cornwall and Phillipson, 1988;
Sesack et al., 1989; Chen and Su, 1990; Hurley et al., 1991;
Vertes, 1991, 1992, 2002, 2004; Otake and Nakamura,
1995; Otake et al., 1995; Vertes et al., 1995, 1999; Ruggiero
et al., 1998; Novak et al., 2000; Krout et al., 2002; Goto
and Swanson, 2004; Peng and Bentivoglio, 2004; Kirouac
et al., 2005, 2006; Otake, 2005; Hoover and Vertes, 2011;
Li and Kirouac, 2012). The main sources of subcortical
input to PV are from structures of the brainstem and
hypothalamus, with additional but more limited input
from the bed nucleus of stria terminalis (BST) and parts
of the amygdala. Similar to other midline nuclei (see
below), PV receives projections from several nuclei/
regions of the brainstem which include the ventral tegmental area (VTA), the pontomesencephalic RF, nucleus
cuneiformis, nucleus of Darkschewitsch, the dorsal and
median raphe nuclei, regions of the PAG, the parabrachial complex, LDT and PPT, the locus coeruleus and the
solitary nucleus (Chen and Su, 1990; Takada et al., 1990;
Bester et al., 1999; Krout and Loewy, 2000a, 2000b; Krout
et al., 2002; Li and Kirouac, 2012).
In a similar manner, PV receives a diverse and widespread set of hypothalamic projections from the tuberomammillary, supramammillary, dorsomedial, posterior,
lateral and parasubthalamic nuclei of the hypothalamus,
as well as from the medial preoptic area and diagonal
band nuclei (Vertes, 1992; Vertes et al., 1995; Goto and
Swanson, 2004; Kirouac et al., 2005, 2006; Menzie et al.,
2010; Li and Kirouac, 2012). In addition, PV is essentially
unique among the midline nuclei in that it is in receipt of
input from the suprachiasmatic nucleus and the intergeniculate leaflet (Moore et al., 2000; Kawano et al., 2001).
The other major source of afferents to PV is from the
cortex, or more specifically from the mPFC and insular
cortices (Groenewegen, 1988; Sesack et al., 1989; Chen

and Su, 1990; Hurley et al., 1991; Vertes, 2002, 2004; Jasmin et al., 2004; Hoover and Vertes, 2011; Li and Kirouac,
2012). Whereas fibers throughout the mPFC project to
PV, there is a dorsal to ventral gradient in density such
that AGm and AC distribute moderately, and PL and
IL massively, to PV (Vertes, 2002, 2004; Li and Kirouac,
2012). Some inputs differentially favor anterior or posterior parts of PV (Li and Kirouac, 2012). Specifically,
the ventral subiculum distributes more heavily to the
anterior than to the posterior PV, whereas IL, PL and the
posterior agranular insular cortex preferentially project
to the posterior PV.
Compared to other midline thalamic nuclei, less is
known about inputs to PT presumably owing to its small
size and the difficulty in selectively targeting PT in tracing studies. Nonetheless, based on anterograde reports
tracing projections to PT, an understanding of major
sources of inputs to PT has emerged (Cornwall and
Phillipson, 1988; Groenewegen, 1988; Sesack et al., 1989;
Chen and Su, 1990; Hurley et al., 1991; Krout et al., 2002;
Vertes, 2002, 2004; Jasmin et al., 2004; Hoover and Vertes,
2011). With some notable exceptions, PT and PV receive
similar sets of projections. Like PV, brainstem inputs to
PT mainly derive from the dorsal and median raphe,
PAG, locus coeruleus, parabrachial complex, LDT, and
the solitary nucleus. Forebrain structures distributing
to PT include the ventral subiculum, the claustrum and
suprachiasmatic nucleus, and less so, the lateral septum,
diagonal band nuclei, BST, medial nucleus of amygdala,
reticular thalamic nucleus, zona incerta and parts of the
hypothalamus (Chen and Su, 1990).
As with PV, the PT receives substantial input from
regions of the “limbic” cortex—or the medial, orbital,
and insular PFC (Sesack et al., 1989; Hurley et al., 1991;
Vertes, 2002, 2004; Jasmin et al., 2004; Hoover and Vertes,
2011). PT is the recipient of numerous fibers from the ventral mPFC (IL and PL) but fewer from the dorsal mPFC
(AC and AGm). In addition, PT is a prominent target of
projections from the (rostral) agranular insular cortex
and the medial (MO) and ventral (VO) orbital cortices
(Jasmin et al., 2004; Hoover and Vertes, 2011). PT appears
to be an important site of convergence for fibers originating in IL, PL, MO, VO and the rostral insular cortex.
The RE of thalamus receives a wide array of afferents
from the cortex, hippocampus, basal forebrain, amygdala, hypothalamus, and brainstem, with major inputs
from the PFC and hippocampal formation (Herkenham,
1978; Sesack et al., 1989; Witter et al., 1990; Wouterlood
et al., 1990; Cullinan and Zaborszky, 1991; Hurley et al.,
1991; Canteras and Swanson, 1992; Vertes, 1991, 1992;
Risold et al., 1994, 1997; Canteras et al., 1995; Vertes et al.,
1995; Naber and Witter, 1998; Canteras and Goto, 1999;
Moore et al., 2000; Krout et al., 2002; Vertes, 2002, 2004;
Jasmin et al., 2004; McKenna and Vertes, 2004; Hoover
and Vertes, 2011).

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Midline Nuclei

The main sources of brainstem afferents to RE are
VTA, PAG, the medial and posterior pretectal nuclei, the
superior colliculus, the precommissural and commissural nuclei, the nucleus of posterior commissure, the
parabrachial complex, PPT, LDT, the dorsal and median
raphe nuclei and nucleus incertus. Probably more so
than other midline nuclei, RE also receives input from
several subcortical forebrain structures including the
claustrum, lateral septum, substantia innominata and
medial/lateral preoptic nuclei of the basal forebrain,
the medial nucleus of amygdala, the paraventricular
and lateral geniculate nuclei of the thalamus, the zona
incerta, and the anterior, ventromedial, lateral, posterior,
supramammillary and dorsal premammillary nuclei of
the hypothalamus (McKenna and Vertes, 2004).
Similar to cortical afferents to PV/PT, reuniens receives
massive projections from the orbitomedial and insular
PFC, but in addition receives very dense projections from
the hippocampus, and to a lesser degree, from parahippocampal cortices. In particular, RE is targeted by the following cortical structures: AGm, AC, PL, IL of the mPFC,
the dorsal and ventral agranular insular cortices, MO, the
retrosplenial, ectorhinal and perirhinal cortices, and the
subiculum of the hippocampus (Fig. 3) (Herkenham, 1978;
Sesack et al., 1989; Hurley et al., 1991; Risold et al., 1997;
Vertes, 2002, 2004; McKenna and Vertes, 2004; Jasmin et al.,
2004; Hoover and Vertes, 2011).
The foregoing indicates that RE is a major site of convergence of a vast and diverse array of afferents largely, but
not solely, originating from limbic-related subcortical and
cortical structures. Accordingly, RE appears to represent
a critical node in the integration and transfer of various
types of limbic information to its main targets, namely, to
the hippocampus and to the prefrontal cortex (see below).
Compared with other midline nuclei, much less
is known about inputs to RH (Sesack et al., 1989;
Hurley et al., 1991; Krout et al., 2002; Vertes, 2002, 2004;
McKenna and Vertes, 2004; Owens, 2005). Although
there is some overlap, afferents to RH are distinct from
those to RE—with a major difference being unlike RE,
the RH receives significant input from non-limbic (sensory/motor) structures. As with other midline and
intralaminar nuclei, the brainstem is a major source of
afferents to RH, originating from such “limbic associated” sites as the VTA, PAG, PPT, LDT and the parabrachial nucleus, but also from “motor” nuclei including
the substantia nigra-pars reticulata, mesencephalic RF,
superior colliculus, and the anterior pretectal nucleus.
In general, subcortical forebrain input to RH is not
extensive, arising most heavily from the claustrum,
substantia innominata, and zona incerta, and to a lesser
extent from the posterior and lateral nuclei of the hypothalamus and parts of the amygdala.
Cortical afferents to RH originate from limbic and nonlimbic regions of the cortex. While fibers throughout the

367

medial wall of the PFC (or mPFC) distribute to RH, they
arise most strongly from the dorsally located AGm and
taper ventrally in the mPFC. In contrast to other midline nuclei, RH receives marked input from the primary
motor cortex and the primary and secondary somatosensory cortices. Aside from inputs from parts of the
insular and medial PFC, RH receives limited projections
from “limbic” cortices, and notably few projections from
the parahippocampal cortices and the hippocampus
(McKenna and Vertes, 2004).

Efferent Projections
Although the midline and intralaminar thalamic
nuclei are often discussed as a unit, their afferent and
certainly their efferent projections differ. In general, the
output of the intralaminar nuclei is fairly restricted and
weighted to sensorimotor structures, whereas that of the
midline nuclei is widespread with a concentration in
limbic forebrain structures.
The PV distributes widely throughout the forebrain to
cortical and subcortical structures, with virtually no projections to the brainstem (Berendse and Groenewegen,
1990, 1991; Meredith and Wouterlood, 1990; Su and
Bentivoglio, 1990; Turner and Herkenham, 1991; Brog
et al., 1993; Condé et al., 1995; Moga et al. 1995; Bubser and
Deutch, 1998; Otake and Nakamura, 1998; Pinto et al.,
2003; Jasmin et al., 2004; Peng and Bentivoglio, 2004; Parsons et al., 2006, 2007; Hoover and Vertes, 2007; Shin et al.,
2008; Li and Kirouac, 2008; Vertes and Hoover, 2008). The
principal targets of PV are the ventral mPFC (infralimbic,
prelimbic and ventral AC cortices), AId, ventral subiculum of hippocampus, the claustrum, the lateral septum,
the core and shell of nucleus accumbens (ACC), the olfactory tubercle (OT), bed nucleus of stria terminalis (BST),
the medial, central, cortical and basal nuclei of amygdala, and the suprachiasmatic, arcuate, and dorsomedial
nuclei of the hypothalamus. PV distributes particularly
densely to the ventral mPFC, ACC, BST and the central,
basal medial and basal lateral nuclei of amygdala (Fig. 7)
(Li and Kirouac, 2008; Vertes and Hoover, 2008). In addition, the caudal, but not the rostral, PV distributes to the
dorsal striatum, and the caudal PV is the source of strong
projections to the mPFC and to the amygdala.
Compared to PV, much less attention has been paid
to the efferent projections of PT, undoubtedly owing to
its small size (Berendse and Groenewegen, 1990, 1991;
Turner and Herkenham, 1991; Brog et al., 1993; Condé
et al., 1995; Van der Werf et al., 2002; Jasmin et al., 2004;
Hoover and Vertes, 2007; Vertes and Hoover, 2008).
Nonetheless, the output of PT is pronounced and parallels that of PV (Vertes and Hoover, 2008). The main cortical targets of PT are the medial frontal polar, anterior
cingulate, prelimbic, infralimbic, medial orbital, dorsal
agranular insular, piriform and entorhinal cortices, and

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

368

16. THALAMUS

FIGURE

7 (A–C) Digital images
showing sites of injection of the retrograde tracer, cholera toxin B, in the lateral bed nucleus of the stria terminalis
(BSTL), the central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA), and the shell of the nucleus
accumbens (AcbSh), respectively. (D-F)
Digital images showing patterns of retrogradely labeled cells (brown) in the
paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus corresponding to the three sites of
injections (A-C): BSTL, CeA and AcbSh.
Note significant numbers of labeled cells
in the paraventricular nucleus, mainly
ipsilateral to the injections, with each of
the injections. Note further the presence
of orexin-containing fibers (black) in the
paraventricular nucleus (PV) which outline the boundaries of PV. Scale bars =
500 μm for A–C; 200 μm for D–F. See text
for further details. From Li, S., & Kirouac,
G.J. (2008). Projections from the paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus to the forebrain, with special emphasis on the extended
amygdala. Journal of Comparative Neurology 506, 263–287.

the ventral subiculum of the hippocampus. Principal
subcortical sites of projection are the claustrum, the core
and shell of ACC, the medial C-P, BST, and caudal parts
of the central and basal nuclei of amygdala. PT also distributes lightly/moderately to the ventral orbital and
perirhinal cortices, the dorsal subiculum, lateral septum,
medial and cortical nuclei of amygdala, and the lateral
hypothalamus (Vertes and Hoover, 2008).
There are some notable differences in the projections
of PT and PV. In brief, the output of PT is more strongly
weighted to (limbic) cortical than to subcortical structures, whereas the opposite is true for PV: subcortical
greater than cortical. Specifically, PT distributes more
widely throughout the cortex, and more intensely than
PV to the MO, ventral mPFC, the lateral entorhinal cortex, the ventral subiculum, and the dorsal striatum. On
the other hand, PV fibers terminate more heavily than
those of PT in the BST, the central and basal nuclei of the
amygdala and most of the hypothalamus. Both PT and

PV, however, distribute massively to the nucleus accumbens (Vertes and Hoover, 2008).
The RE is the largest of the midline nuclei and the
most thoroughly investigated, likely owing to the early
demonstration that RE is a major source of input to the
hippocampus (Herkenham, 1978). Although reuniens
distributes to a few subcortical sites, it predominantly
targets cortical structures (Herkenham, 1978; Ohtake
and Yamada, 1989; Su and Bentivoglio, 1990; Wouterlood
et al., 1990; Wouterlood, 1991; Dolleman-Van der Weel
and Witter, 1996; Risold et al., 1997; Bokor et al., 2002; Van
der Werf et al., 2002; Vertes, 2006; Vertes et al., 2006, 2007;
Hoover and Vertes, 2007, 2012; Cavdar et al. 2008; Varela
et al., 2014). These mainly include the medial and ventral
orbital cortices, infralimbic, prelimbic and anterior cingulate cortices of the mPFC, the dorsal and ventral agranular insular cortices, rostral retrosplenial cortex, perirhinal
cortex, medial and lateral entorhinal cortices, and the hippocampal formation. RE fibers distribute massively to the

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Midline Nuclei

hippocampus terminating selectively in the stratum lacunosum-moleculare (slm) of CA1 of the dorsal and ventral
hippocampus as well as the molecular layer of the dorsal
and ventral subiculum and the parasubiculum. RE axons
form asymmetric (excitatory) contacts predominantly on
distal dendrites of pyramidal cells in slm of CA1 and the
subiculum (Wouterlood et al., 1990). There is an absence of
RE projections to CA2 and CA3 and to the dentate gyrus
of the hippocampus. Subcortical projections of RE are limited and mainly directed to the claustrum and to the anterior pole of nucleus accumbens.
Examinations of the physiological effects of RE on
the hippocampus and on the PFC have shown that RE
exerts pronounced excitatory actions at CA1 of the hippocampus and at the mPFC (Dolleman-Van der Weel
et al., 1997; Bertram and Zhang 1999; Viana Di Prisco
and Vertes, 2006). Dolleman-Van der Weel et al. (1997)
demonstrated that RE stimulation produced large negative-going field potentials (sink) at slm of CA1 as well
as paired pulse facilitation at CA1. Bertram and Zhang
(1999) compared the effects of RE and CA3 stimulation
on population responses (field EPSPs and spikes) at CA1
and reported that RE actions at CA1 were equivalent to,
and in some cases considerably greater than, those of
CA3 at CA1. They concluded that the RE projection to
the hippocampus “allows for the direct and powerful
excitation of the CA1 region. This thalamo-hippocampal connection bypasses the trisynaptic/commissural
pathway that has been thought to be the exclusive excitatory drive to CA1.” More recently, Viana Di Prisco and
Vertes (2006) confirmed the excitatory effects of RE on
the hippocampus, and further showed that RE stimulation produced large monosynaptically-elicited evoked
responses dorsoventrally throughout the mPFC, with
most pronounced actions (latency and amplitude) at
the ventral mPFC—or at the prelimbic and infralimbic
cortices.
The actions of RE on the hippocampus and the mPFC
could involve a common group of RE cells with collaterals to both sites, or more likely separate populations of
RE neurons. Relevant to this, recent studies (using double retrograde fluorescent techniques) have shown that
approximately 5–10% of RE cells project, via collaterals,
to both the hippocampus and the ventral mPFC (Fig. 8)
(Hoover and Vertes, 2012; Varela et al., 2014). Further, RE
neurons projecting to one site or the other (non-branching) were shown to largely reside in separate regions
of RE; that is, cells projecting to the mPFC were mainly
localized to the perireuniens nucleus (or lateral wings
of RE), while those distributing to the hippocampus
were concentrated in the rostral pole of RE (Hoover and
Vertes, 2012; Varela et al., 2014). The issue, then, of the
origin of RE cells that exert separate, as opposed to possibly combined, effects on the hippocampus and mPFC
needs to be further investigated.

369

FIGURE 8  Single and double labeled cells in the nucleus reuniens
(RE) of thalamus following retrograde fluorescent injections in the rat
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and the hippocampus. (A) Confocal
microscope images at three rostrocaudal levels of nucleus reuniens
(left to right) depicting the presence of labeled cells in RE following
injections in the mPFC (red) or the hippocampus (green). White arrows
denote double-labeled cells. (B) Confocal image showing labeled cells
in nucleus reuniens following injections in the infralimbic cortex (red)
and the dorsal hippocampus (green). (C) Enlargement of the boxed
area in (B) depicting double-labeled cells (white arrows) in RE. (D)
Confocal image showing labeled cells in nucleus reuniens following
injections in the infralimbic cortex (red) and the ventral hippocampus
(green). (E) Enlargement of the boxed area in (D) depicting doublelabeled cells (white arrows) in RE. Abbreviations: RE, nucleus reuniens;
PRe perireuniens nucleus. Scale bars for A=200 μm; for B–E=100 μm.
From Varela, C., Kumar, S., Yang, J.Y., & Wilson, M.A. (2014). Anatomical substrates for direct interactions between hippocampus, medial prefrontal
cortex, and the thalamic nucleus reuniens. Brain Structure and Function,
219, 911–929.

While it is well recognized that the hippocampus gives
rise to pronounced projections to the medial prefrontal cortex (Swanson, 1981, Ferino et al., 1987; Jay and Witter, 1991;

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

370

16. THALAMUS

Carr and Sesack, 1996; Hoover and Vertes, 2007), interestingly there are no return projections from the mPFC to
the hippocampus (Laroche et al., 2000; Vertes, 2004). The
demonstration, however, of strong projections from the
mPFC to RE and, in turn, from the RE to the hippocampus (Vertes, 2002; Vertes et al., 2006) suggests that RE may
be a main route for the transfer of information from the
mPFC to the hippocampus—thus completing an important functional loop between these structures. Supporting
this, mPFC fibers distributing to the RE have been shown
to form asymmetric (excitatory) contacts on dendrites of
RE cells projecting to the hippocampus (Vertes et al., 2007).
Unlike RE, relatively few reports have described the
efferent projections of RH (Ohtake and Yamada, 1989;
Berendse and Groenewegen, 1990, 1991; Van der Werf
et al., 2002; Vertes et al., 2006, Hoover and Vertes, 2007).
In contrast to the cortical projections of RE which are
largely restricted to “limbic cortices,” those of RH distribute widely over the cortex to limbic and non-limbic
regions. The cortical targets of RH are the medial orbital
cortex, the AGm, AC, PL and IL of the mPFC, the posterior agranular insular, primary and secondary somatosensory, retrosplenial, posterior parietal, perirhinal,
occipital, and temporal cortices, and the hippocampal
formation. Similar to RE, RH fibers terminate within the
slm of CA1 of the dorsal and ventral hippocampus as
well as in the outer molecular layer of the dorsal and
ventral subiculum. RH projections, however, to the hippocampus are less pronounced than those from RE.
The main subcortical termination sites of RH fibers are
the claustrum, the dorsal striatum, the lateral septum, the
core and shell of nucleus accumbens, the olfactory tubercle and the basal medial and basal lateral nuclei of the
amygdala. Although present, RH projections to the striatum are restricted to medial aspects of C-P, and are much
less abundant than those to the striatum from the central medial nucleus (see above). Consistent with diverse
inputs to RH from limbic and non-limbic sites, RH fibers
spread widely throughout the cortex to sensorimotor,
associational and limbic regions of the cortex (Berendse
and Groenewegen, 1991; Vertes et al., 2006). Accordingly,
RH seems well positioned to bridge the sensorimotor and
limbic domains, possibly providing limbic support (emotional/cognitive) for goal directed behaviors.

Functional Aspects
Regarding function, the midline nuclei that have
received the most attention are the PV and RE. Due in
part to its close proximity to RE, the RH is often included
with RE in behavioral studies.
The PV receives a wide array of afferents from arousal/
attention-related sites of the brainstem and hypothalamus, including a major input from orexin-containing
cells of the lateral hypothalamus (Peyron et al., 1998). PV,

in turn, projects to limbic subcortical and cortical sites
including the mPFC, nucleus accumbens, BST, and the
central and basal nuclei of the amygdala. Accordingly,
PV is reportedly involved in a range of functions which
would include stress and anxiety, feeding behavior, and
drug seeking activities.
PV is activated by wide variety of stressors (e.g., fear/
anxiety, immobilization, footshock) and hence appears
to be responsive to stress, per se, independent of specific
types of stressors (Chastrette et al., 1991; Bubser and
Deutch, 1999). PV has been shown to be instrumental
in the adaptation to acute stressors following periods of
chronic stress. For example, rats exposed to a repeated
(chronic) stressor become habituated to that stressor, so
that its re-introduction produces less of a response than
the initial exposure. However, if a different stressor is
introduced after habituation, the response to it is magnified, possibly signaling the presence of novel, potentially
threatening, stimuli. PV appears to be involved in both
processes: that is, adaptation to the original stressor and
the heightened response to a novel stressor (Bhatnagar
and Dallman, 1998; Bhatnagar et al., 2002; Heydendael
et al., 2011). Specifically, posterior PV lesions block
habituation to repeated restraint stress (Bhatnagar et al.,
2002) and c-fos expression in PV is significantly elevated
when novel stressors are applied after a chronic stressor
(Bhatnagar and Dallman, 1998).
Although more typically responsive to “negative”
stimuli, PV cells are also activated by rewarding conditions and thus seem to generally encode emotionally
salient events (Igelstrom et al., 2010; Hsu et al., 2014).
Accordingly, PV serves a role in feeding behavior—which
may be a model system for appetitive functions. In particular, c-fos levels in PV are enhanced in anticipation of
feeding in food-deprived rats, and PV lesions attenuate
anticipatory locomotor activity associated with feeding
(Nakahara et al. 2004; Angeles-Castellanos et al. 2007).
Kelley et al. (2005) advanced a model to account for the
encoding of the incentive value of foods. Among other
things, the model predicted when incentive values are
high (very desirable foods), feeding would ensue even
under sated conditions. The proposed circuit for this
effect(s) was a hypothalamic-thalamic-striatal network
of which PV served an integral role. PV was thought
to be critically involved in the transfer of various types
of affective/homeostatic information to the striatum in
food seeking behavior, or as was stated: “PVT may act
as an interface between signals related to arousal, energy
balance, circadian or diurnal rhythms, and reward, and
major striatal motor output systems” (Kelley et al., 2005).
Consistent with this, Choi et al. (2012) demonstrated that
direct injections of orexin-A in PV produced a marked
increase in dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens
and elicited hedonic feeding—an overconsumption of
palatable foods.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Midline Nuclei

Similar to the reward circuit for food (Kelley et al.,
2005; Choi et al., 2010, 2012), the postulated core circuitry for drug seeking behavior involves orexinergic
projections from the lateral hypothalamus to PV and
from PV to the nucleus accumbens (for review, MartinFardon and Boutrel, 2012). Regarding a role for PV in
drug-seeking behavior, lesions or inactivation PV suppress drug-seeking activities (Hamlin et al., 2009; James
et al., 2010; Marchant et al., 2010), while cue-induced
reinstatement of cocaine seeking behavior strongly correlates with c-fos activation in PV (James et al., 2011).
Further, injections of orexin-A in PV reinstated extinguished cocaine and sweetened condensed milk (SCM)
seeking behavior (Martin-Fardon et al., 2011). Finally,
there may be a link between a PV involvement in stress/
anxiety and in overeating and drug seeking behavior in
that stress tends to exacerbate both behaviors (MartinFardon and Boutrel, 2012; James and Dayas, 2013).
The RE mainly targets the orbitomedial PFC, parahippocampal cortices and the hippocampus, whereas
the RH also distributes (but less heavily) to these structures, and additionally to sensorimotor cortices, the
nucleus accumbens, and parts of the amygdala (Vertes
et al., 2006). In contrast to the involvement of the dorsal
midline thalamus in affective behaviors, the prominent
(reciprocal) RE connections with limbic cortices, particularly the hippocampus and mPFC, points to a direct role
in cognitive functions.
A number of studies have examined the effects of
lesions (or inactivation) of RE on behavior, with many of
them including RH with RE, together referred to as the
ventral midline thalamus (Dolleman-van der Weel et al.,
2009; Davoodi et al., 2009, 2011; Eleore et al., 2011; Hembrook and Mair, 2011; Hembrook et al., 2012; Loureiro
et al., 2012; Cholvin et al., 2013; Prasad et al., 2013). While
a consensus has not been reached, it appears that RE is
critically involved in behaviors that depend on interactions between the hippocampus and the mPFC. In an initial study, Dolleman-van der Weel et al. (2009) reported
that rats with excitotoxic lesions of RE were comparable
to controls in both the acquisition and retention of a
water maze reference memory task. Specifically, on the
probe test following acquisition, RE lesioned rats swam
directly to the correct quadrant of the pool, but upon not
finding the platform, immediately adopted a strategy
of searching the entire pool for the platform. The deficit was described as non-mnemonic or a reduced ability to shift strategies—or adopting a much too flexible
(or impulsive) pattern of behavior. In effect, the altered
search strategy was viewed as a medial PFC rather than
a hippocampal dysfunction. Subsequent studies have
similarly shown that inactivation of RE/RH does not
alter acquisition or retrieval on the standard water maze
task (Loureiro et al., 2012; Cholvin et al., 2013). In accord
with the findings of Dolleman-van der Weel et al. (2009),

371

Prasad et al. (2013) showed that rats with RE lesions were
unable to inhibit premature responses in a 5 choice reaction time task—an impulsive behavioral pattern characteristic of damage to the PFC (Chudasama et al. 2003).
In complementary reports, Mair and associates
(Hembrook and Mair, 2011; Hembrook et al., 2012)
described the involvement of RE in tasks that depend
on the interactions between the hippocampus and
the mPFC. As previously discussed, Hembrook and
Mair (2011) initially showed that RE/RH lesions produced no impairment on a visuospatial reaction time
task sensitive to alterations of the striatum and motor
cortex, but such lesions significantly altered performance on a win-shift radial maze task—or one that is
affected by damage to the hippocampus or the mPFC
(McDonald and White, 1993; Porter and Mair, 1997;
Mair et al., 1998). Hembrook et al. (2012) subsequently
compared the effects of inactivation of RE/RH on performance on two tasks: (1) a delayed non-match to
position (DNMTP) task in an operant chamber that is
sensitive to lesions of the hippocampus or the mPFC;
and (2) a variable choice radial maze delayed nonmatching (VC-DNM) task that is affected by hippocampal but not by mPFC lesions (Porter et al., 2000).
RE/RH inactivation significantly disrupted performance on the DNMTP task but not on the VC-DNM
task. The authors concluded that “RE and RH affect
measures of spatial working memory that depend on
interactions of between the hippocampus and mPFC,
but not measures that depend on the hippocampus
alone” (Hembrook et al., 2012).
Using a different set of tasks, Cassel and colleagues
similarly concluded that RE/RH selectively participates
in functions requiring interactions between the hippocampus and the mPFC (Loureiro et al., 2012; Cassel
et al., 2013; Cholvin et al., 2013). Specifically, lesions of
RE/RH had no effect on either acquisition or short-term
retention (5 days post-acquisition) of a water maze task,
but disrupted long-term retention (25 days) on the task
(Loureiro et al., 2012). As was pointed out, recent memory (5 days) involves the hippocampus, whereas remote
memory (25 days) invokes both the hippocampus and
the mPFC (Clark et al., 2005; Broadbent et al., 2006; Teixeira et al., 2006; Lopez et al., 2012).
In a subsequent report, Cholvin et al. (2013) compared
the effects of inactivation of the hippocampus, mPFC or
the RE/RH on a standard water maze (WM) task and on a
double-H WM task that places demands on both the hippocampus (place identification) and the mPFC (strategyshifting) for successful completion. Only hippocampal
inactivation impaired performance on the standard WM
task, whereas inactivation of the hippocampus, mPFC, or
the RE/RH disrupted performance, and to a similar degree,
on the double-H maze task. According to the authors, the
hippocampus serves a recognized role in spatial memory,

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

372

16. THALAMUS

the mPFC in set shifting, and RE/RH may act “as the coordinator of this processing” (Cholvin et al., 2013).

RETICULAR NUCLEUS
The RT of the thalamus forms a thin neuronal sheet,
positioned at the rostral, dorsolateral, lateral, and ventrolateral margins of the thalamus. The RT is strategically “placed” between the thalamus and the cerebral
hemisphere, such that all incoming and outgoing fibers
of the thalamus pass through it, most of which send
collaterals to a restricted part of the reticular nucleus.
Reticular thalamic neurons have a relatively extensive
dendritic tree extending in a disk-like fashion in the
same plane as the thin sheet formed by the RT (Jones,
1985, 2007; Spreafico et al., 1991; Ohara and Havton,
1996). Frequent dendrodendritic junctions (i.e., synapses
and puncta) have been noted in bundles of dendrites of
RT neurons, indicating a special form of interneuronal
communication within the reticular nucleus (Pinault
et al., 1997; Liu and Jones, 1999). Reticular thalamic neurons are all GABAergic and express parvalbumin, while
a subset of RT cells contains calretinin (Mitrofanis, 1992;
Lizier et al., 1997). The RT in rats is a relatively welldeveloped nucleus that provides important GABAergic
control of the thalamus, where in rats, GABAergic interneurons are relatively sparse (Price, 1995). The ventral
lateral geniculate nucleus and the subgeniculate nucleus
(ventral to VLG) form a dorsolateral and caudal extension of the caudal reticular nucleus and may be considered the “reticular” part of the visual thalamus. These
nuclei are derived from the prethalamus embryonically,
and their structural and connectional characteristics are
very similar to those of RT (Jones, 1985, 2007). A specific
visual sector of RT, however, also exists (Coleman and
Mitrofanis, 1996).
During prenatal development, a considerable number of neurons exist within the internal capsule, laterally
adjacent to the reticular nucleus, forming the so-called
perireticular nucleus (Mitrofanis and Guillery, 1993).
These neurons have been shown to project to the (dorsal) thalamus (Mitrofanis et al., 1995), but probably not
to the cortex (Coleman and Mitrofanis, 1999). The perireticular neurons are thought to play a role in guiding
axons during development; the function of the relatively few surviving perireticular neurons in adulthood
remains to be established (Amadeo et al., 1998; Coleman
and Mitrofanis, 1999).

Afferent and Efferent Projections
Unlike most other thalamic nuclei, RT does not
project to the cortex but sends fibers almost exclusively to the thalamus (Vaccaro and Mitrofanis, 1997).
The projections from RT to thalamic nuclei are highly

topographically organized. Individual thalamic nuclei
receive projections from a specific subset of spatially
segregated reticular neurons (e.g., Jones, 1985, 2007;
Kolmac and Mitrofanis, 1997; Pinault and Deschênes,
1998a; Pinault, 2004). Based on large numbers of juxtacellularly filled reticular neurons, Pinault and
Deschênes (1998a) showed that the terminal fields of
these neurons in thalamic nuclei are well-focused with
a patchy distribution of boutons, and that RT–thalamic
projections are organized largely in parallel with thalamo-RT projections with only a slight degree of divergence. For the relationship of the ventrobasal complex
with RT, this divergence appears to lead to an intrathalamic pathway which links this first-order thalamic
nucleus via RT with the higher order posterior thalamic
nucleus (Crabtree et al., 1998).
Whereas interconnections between different thalamic nuclei via the reticular nucleus might exist, the
high degree of topography between RT and individual
thalamic nuclei is remarkable. The result of this strict
topography is that each individual, functionally distinct thalamic nucleus is represented in a restricted
“sector” of RT (Gonzalo-Ruiz et al., 1995; Jones, 1985,
2007; Hayama et al., 1994; Kolmac and Mitrofanis, 1997;
Crabtree, 1999; Stehberg et al., 2001; Kimura et al., 2007b,
2012). The relationships with the midline thalamic
nuclei appear to be less strictly organized (Kolmac and
Mitrofanis, 1997). Whereas projections from PV of the
midline thalamus to RT have not been described, PV
receives input from a group of cells located ventromedially in RT (Moga et al., 1995; Vertes and Hoover,
2008; Li and Kirouac, 2012). Connections between RT,
RE, and the hippocampus appear to be topographically
organized. As discussed, RE is a major source of input
to the hippocampus, and RE and the hippocampus project to the same rostral area of RT (Cavdar et al., 2008).
In addition, fibers from limbic and cognitive associated
structures including the mPFC, mediodorsal nucleus,
and anterior thalamic nuclei also appear to converge
on the rostral RT (Cornwall et al., 1990; Gonzalo-Ruiz
et al., 1995).
The main afferents to RT originate from the thalamus
and the cortex. As mentioned, thalamic inputs to RT are
collaterals of the thalamocortical axons, are strictly topographically organized, and rather faithfully reciprocate
RT-thalamic projections (Jones, 1985, 2007; Mitrofanis
and Guillery, 1993). Likewise, corticothalamic axons
send collaterals to the RT sector associated with the thalamic nucleus to which they are interconnected. In this
way, RT is organized such that distinct functional and
modality-specific sectors can be parsed out, and these
RT sectors receive congruent cortical and thalamic glutamatergic inputs (Kharazia and Weinberg, 1994; Eaton
and Salt, 1996; Crabtree, 1999; Jones, 2006). There is,
however, some overlap between modality specific sectors for some RT neurons. The firing properties of these

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

Reticular Nucleus

373

FIGURE 9  Schematic representation of the intricate relationships of the reticular nucleus (RT) of thalamus with the
(dorsal) thalamus and specific layers of the cerebral cortex. The
reticular nucleus (RT) (or TRN) receives collaterals from thalamocortical fibers originating in virtually all nuclei of the thalamus, while most of the corticothalamic fibers likewise issue
collaterals to RT. However, as such collaterals are common for
the corticothalamic fibers originating in layer 6, the “modulatory” corticothalamic projections, collaterals are absent from
corticothalamic fibers arising from more superficial layers.
This is correlated with a distinction in first-order and higher
order thalamic nuclei and their cortical associations. So-called
first-order (FO) thalamic nuclei receive their main “driving”
afferents from ascending specific afferents, such as somatosensory or visual modalities, while so-called higher order (HO)
thalamic nuclei receive their main driving afferents from layer
5 of the cerebral cortex. Thalamic afferents originating from
layer 5 of the cortex and primary ascending fibers are morphologically very comparable, terminating as RL-type boutons,
and thought to be drivers of the various thalamic nuclei (Sherman and Guillery, 2001). However, neither descending layer 5
axons nor ascending sensory afferents issue collaterals to the
reticular thalamic nucleus. Apart from the dorsal thalamic and
deep cerebral cortical layers, the reticular thalamic nucleus is
targeted by several brainstem and basal forebrain inputs. From
Guillery, R.W., Feig, S.L., & Lozsadi, D.A. (1998). Paying attention to the thalamic reticular nucleus. Trends in Neuroscience 21,
28–32.

RT cells illustrate this crossmodal input, responding
to sensory stimuli across two or more sensory modalities (Crabtree and Isaac, 2002; Yu et al., 2011). Additionally, a recent study by Kimura and colleagues (Kimura
et al., 2007b) found a restricted population of RT neurons located in the auditory sector send projections to
somatosensory thalamic nuclei including the ventral
posterior and posterior nuclei, further establishing crossmodal connections.
The terminal fields of both cortical and thalamic afferents mostly form narrow disk-like patterns that are oriented perpendicular to the parent axons and conform to
the shape and orientation of the dendrites of reticular
neurons (Mitrofanis and Guillery, 1993). However, even
though the topography of projections between the cortex
and RT as well as between the thalamus and RT show
such a strict point-to-point relationship, it is unclear how
precise these relationships are at the microcircuit level
(Pinault and Deschênes, 1998a; Guillery et al., 1998; Sherman and Guillery, 2001, 2006). Thus, it is uncertain, for
example, whether point-to-point relationships are present such that strict reciprocal relationships exist between
individual thalamic and reticular neurons, whether cortical afferents project to reticular neurons that precisely
target the same thalamic neurons as these corticothalamic
fibers, or whether “adjacent” neurons in the thalamus are
innervated by the reticular neurons. The actual organization of specific cortical–reticular–thalamic microcircuits
may even differ across thalamic nuclei which may tip the

balance between a precise inhibitory feedback, an inhibitory feed forward, or different forms of lateral inhibition
in thalamic nuclei (Pinault and Deschênes, 1998b; Sherman and Guillery, 2001).
As discussed by Sherman and Guillery (2001), an
important aspect of the innervation of RT may be that
modulatory, but not driving, inputs mainly constitute thalamic or cortical projections to RT. For cortical
inputs this would mean that corticothalamic fibers from
layer 6, which terminate as type I fibers in the thalamus
would send collaterals to RT, whereas corticothalamic
fibers from layer 5, which are mainly corticofugal fibers
descending to the brainstem or spinal cord would not
project to RT (Fig. 9) (Deschênes et al., 1994; Bourassa
et al., 1995). Likewise, ascending driving afferents, for
example, those of the somatosensory system, would
not collateralize to RT. Whether this distinction between
type I and type II afferents in relation to the reticular
nucleus can be regarded as a general rule remains to be
established.
Afferents to RT also arise from the basal forebrain and
brainstem, and include monoaminergic and cholinergic
input. Immunohistochemical studies have found a significant dopaminergic innervation of the ventral RT which
appears to originate from the substantia nigra-pars compacta (Anaya-Martinez et al., 2006; García-Cabezas et al.,
2009; Cebrian and Prensa, 2010). Serotonergic input to
RT primarily originates from the dorsal raphe nucleus
and the supralemniscal nucleus (B9), while cholinergic

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

374

16. THALAMUS

fibers arise from the basal forebrain and the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus (Woolf et al., 1986; Hallanger
et al., 1987; Vertes et al., 2010; Rodriguez et al., 2011).
Other afferents include the substantia nigra-pars reticulata, zona incerta, and cerebellar nuclei (Cavdar et al.,
2002, 2006; Gulcebi et al., 2012).

Functional Aspects
The prevailing interpretation of the functional role of
RT is that it serves attentional mechanisms, as originally
proposed in Crick’s (1984) “searchlight hypothesis” (Guillery et al., 1998; McAlonan and Brown, 2002). The abovedescribed highly topographical arrangement of afferents
and efferents to different sectors of RT suggests a specific
functional role for RT for each thalamic nucleus. Lesions
of RT produce impairments in attentional and priming
functions but not sensorimotor deficits (Weese et al., 1999).
Additionally, increases in c-fos activity were detected in
visual sectors of RT when rats attended to visual stimuli,
but not in other sectors despite the presence of both visual
and tactile stimuli (McAlonan et al., 2000; Montero, 2000;
Petrof and Brown, 2010). The RT importantly regulates
the firing of thalamocortical projection neurons and, in
this way, may influence the selection of the information
that is transferred from the thalamus to the cortex.
The reticular nucleus also plays an important role as a
pacemaker during synchronized firing of thalamocortical cells. Two different firing patterns exist in the thalamocortical system; that is, a “tonic” and a “burst mode”
(Jahnsen and Llinás, 1984; McCormick and Fraser, 1990).
The tonic mode is associated with vigilance and behavioral
states. In the tonic mode of thalamocortical activity, information from ascending sensory pathways is transferred
linearly through the thalamus to the cortex. Burst firing
occurs during sleep, as well as during epileptic seizures
(Fuentealba and Steriade, 2005). In the bursting mode, relay
of information to the cortex is either prevented or nonlinearly transmitted. Thus, in the latter case, thalamocortical
neurons may still respond during burst firing but the message is not relayed to the cortex in the same form as during
tonic firing (Guido et al., 1995; Guillery et al., 1998). During burst firing, however, there is a higher signal-to-noise
ratio, possibly providing a mechanism for the selection of
specific, novel information to reach the cortex (Guido and
Weynand, 1995; Guillery et al., 1998).
The precise physiological mechanisms by which the RT
exerts its gating role remain to be established. There might
be a prominent contribution of descending corticothalamic fibers, at least for the visual system (Montero, 2000),
that may bias the network to attending to a specific stimulus (Hartings et al., 2000). Numerically, cortical inputs to
RT dominate other inputs (Liu and Jones, 1999; Golshani
et al., 2001). Subcortical afferents, originating from the
brainstem RF, the basal forebrain, or the thalamus also

exert their influence on particular sectors of RT, although
apparently less focused (Kolmac and Mitrofanis, 2001).
Notwithstanding the specificity of connections and functions of RT, the nucleus might also act as a unit and generate general synchronized thalamocortical activity, in this
way “closing” the thalamocortical gate as during sleep. In
cats, sleep spindles, which occur during slow wave sleep,
are generated and dependent on the bursting activity triggered by the RT (Paré et al., 1987; Steriade et al., 1987; Contreras et al., 1996). The mechanisms by which the activity
of RT neurons are synchronously entrained is presently
unknown, but electrical synapses are thought to play a
crucial role (Landisman et al., 2002; Pinault, 2004; Fuentealba and Steriade, 2005; Nagaeva and Akhmadeev, 2006;
Ferrarelli and Tononi, 2011).

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Michelle Gallo for her assistance with the reference
list. The preparation of the chapter was supported in part by NSF grant
IOS 0820639 and by NIH grant MH099590 to RPV and by the Kavli
Foundation and the Norwegian Research Council to MPW.

References
Aggleton, J. P., & Brown, M. W. (1999). Episodic memory, amnesia, and
the hippocampal–anterior thalamic axis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 425–444.
Aggleton, J. P., & Brown, M. W. (2006). Interleaving brain systems for episodic and recognition memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 455–463.
Aggleton, J. P., Dumont, J. R., & Warburton, E. C. (2011). Unraveling the
contributions of the diencephalon to recognition memory: a review.
Learning and Memory, 18, 384–400.
Aggleton, J. P., O’Mara, S. M., Vann, S. D., Wright, N. F., Tsanov, M.,
& Erichsen, J. T. (2010). Hippocampal-anterior thalamic pathways
for memory: uncovering a network of direct and indirect actions.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 2292–2307.
Ahissar, E., & Arieli, A. (2001). Figuring space by time. Neuron, 32,
185–201.
Ahissar, E., Sosnik, R., & Haidarliu, S. (2000). Transformation from
temporal to rate coding in a somatosensory thalamocortical pathway. Nature, 406, 302–306.
Albo, Z., Viana Di Prisco, G., & Vertes, R. P. (2003). Anterior thalamic
unit discharge profiles and coherence with hippocampal theta
rhythm. Thalamus and Related Systems, 2,133–144.
Albo, Z., Viana Di Prisco, G., & Vertes, R. P. (2011). Multisite spike-field
coherence, theta rhythmicity and information flow within Papez’s
circuit. In R. P. Vertes, & R. W. Stackman (Eds.), Electrophysiological
Recording Techniques (pp. 191–214). New York: Humana Press.
Aldes, L. D. (1988). Thalamic connectivity of rat somatomotor cortex.
Brain Research Bulletin, 20, 333–348.
Alloway, K. D. (2008). Information processing streams in rodent barrel
cortex: the differential functions of barrel and septal circuits. Cerebral Cortex, 18, 979–989.
Alloway, K. D., Zhang, M., & Chakrabarti, S. (2004). Septal columns in
rodent barrel cortex: functional circuits for modulating whisking
behavior. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 480, 299–309.
Amadeo, A., De Biasi, S., Frassoni, C., Ortino, B., & Spreafico, R. (1998).
Immunocytochemical and ultrastructural study of the rat perireticular thalamic nucleus during postnatal development. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 392, 390–401.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

References

Anaya-Martinez, V., Martinez-Marcos, A., Martinez-Fong, D., Aceves,
J., & Erlij, D. (2006). Substantia nigra compacta neurons that innervate the reticular thalamic nucleus in the rat also project to striatum
or globus pallidus: implications for abnormal motor behavior. Neuroscience, 143, 477–486.
Angaut, P., Cicirata, F., & Serapide, F. (1985). Topographic organization
of the cerebellothalamic projections in the rat: An autoradiographic
study. Neuroscience, 15, 389–401.
Angeles-Castellanos, M., Mendoza, J., & Escobar, C. (2007). Restricted
feeding schedules phase shift daily rhythms of c-Fos and protein
Per1 immunoreactivity in corticolimbic regions in rats. Neuroscience, 144, 344–355.
Arai, M., Arai, R., Kani, K., & Jacobowitz, D. M. (1992). Immunohistochemical localization of calretinin in the rat lateral geniculate
nucleus and its retino-geniculate projection. Brain Research, 596,
215–222.
Arai, R., Jacobowitz, D. M., & Deura, S. (1994). Distribution of calretinin, calbindin-D28k, and parvalbumin in the rat thalamus. Brain
Research Bulletin, 33, 595–614.
Arbuthnott, G. W., MacLeod, N. K., Maxwell, D. J., & Wright, A. K.
(1990). Distribution and synaptic contacts of the cortical terminals
arising from neurons in the rat ventromedial thalamic nucleus.
Neuroscience, 38, 47–60.
Arnault, P., & Roger, M. (1990). Ventral temporal cortex in the rat: Connections of secondary auditory areas Te2 and Te3. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 302, 110–123.
Aumann, T. D., & Horne, M. K. (1996). Ramification and termination of
single axons in the cerebellothalamic pathway of the rat. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 376, 420–430.
Aumann, T. D., Ivanusic, J., & Horne, M. K. (1998). Arborisation and
termination of single motor thalamocortical axons in the rat. Journal
of Comparative Neurology, 396, 121–130.
Aumann, T. D., Rawson, J. A., Finkelstein, D. I., & Horne, M. K. (1994).
Projections from the lateral and interposed cerebellar nuclei to the
thalamus of the rat: A light and electron microscopic study using
single and double anterograde labelling. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 349, 165–181.
Bailey, K. R., & Mair, R. G. (2004). Dissociable effects of frontal cortical
lesions on measures of visuospatial attention and spatial working
memory in the rat. Cerebral Cortex, 14, 974–985.
Bailey, K. R., & Mair, R. G. (2005). Lesions of specific and nonspecific
thalamic nuclei affect prefrontal cortex-dependent aspects of spatial working memory. Behavioral Neuroscience, 119, 410–419.
Backonja, M., Wang, B., & Miletic, V. (1994). Responses of neurons in
the ventrolateral orbital cortex to noxious cutaneous stimulation
in a rat model of peripheral mononeuropathy. Brain Research, 639,
337–340.
Barker, G. R., Bird, F., Alexander, V., & Warburton, E. C. (2007). Recognition memory for objects, place, and temporal order: a disconnection analysis of the role of the medial prefrontal cortex and
perirhinal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 2948–2957.
Barker, G. R., & Warburton, E. C. (2011). When is the hippocampus
involved in recognition memory? Journal of Neuroscience, 31,
10721–10731.
Barthó, P., Freund, T. F., & Acsády, L. (2002). Selective GABAergic
innervation of thalamic nuclei from zona incerta. European Journal
of Neuroscience, 16, 999–1014.
Bartlett, E. L., & Smith, P. H. (1999). Anatomic, intrinsic, and synaptic properties of dorsal and ventral division neurons in rat medial
geniculate body. Journal of Neurophysiology, 81, 1999–2016.
Bartlett, E. L., Stark, J. M., Guillery, R. W., & Smith, P. H. (2000). Comparison of the fine structure of cortical and collicular terminals in
the rat medial geniculate body. Neuroscience, 100, 811–828.
Bassant, M. H., & Poindessous-Jazat, F. (2001). Ventral tegmental
nucleus of Gudden: a pontine hippocampal theta generator? Hippocampus, 11, 809–813.

375

Bassett, J. P., & Taube, J. S. (2005). Head direction signal generation:
ascending and descending information streams. In S. I. Wiener, &
J. S. Taube (Eds.), Head Direction Cells and the Neural Mechanisms of
Spatial Orientation (pp. 83–109). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Battaglia, G., Spreafico, R., & Rustioni, A. (1992). Substance P innervation of the rat and cat thalamus. I. Distribution and relation to
ascending spinal pathways. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 315,
457–472.
Bentivoglio, M., Balercia, G., & Kruger, L. (1991). The specificity of the
nonspecific thalamus: the midline nuclei. Progress in Brain Research,
87, 53–80.
Berendse, H. W., & Groenewegen, H. J. (1990). Organization of the
thalamostriatal projections in the rat, with special emphasis on the
ventral striatum. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 299, 187–228.
Berendse, H. W., & Groenewegen, H. J. (1991). Restricted cortical termination fields of the midline and intralaminar thalamic nuclei in the
rat. Neuroscience, 42, 73–102.
Bertram, E. H., & Zhang, D. X. (1999). Thalamic excitation of hippocampal CA1 neurons: a comparison with the effects of CA3 stimulation. Neuroscience, 92, 15–26.
Bester, H., Bourgeais, L., Villanueva, L., Besson, J. M., & Bernard, J.
F. (1999). Differential projections to the intralaminar and gustatory
thalamus from the parabrachial area: a PHA-L study in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 405, 421–499.
Bezdudnaya, T., & Keller, A. (2008). Laterodorsal nucleus of the thalamus: A processor of somatosensory inputs. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 507, 1979–1989.
Bhatnagar, S., & Dallman, M. (1998). Neuroanatomical basis for facilitation of hypothalamic- pituitary-adrenal responses to a novel
stressor after chronic stress. Neuroscience, 84, 1025–1039.
Bhatnagar, S., Huber, R., Nowak, N., & Trotter, P. (2002). Lesions of the
posterior paraventricular thalamus block habituation of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal responses to repeated restraint. Journal of
Neuroendocrinology, 14, 403–410.
Billet, S., Cant, N. B., & Hall, W. C. (1999). Cholinergic projections to
the visual thalamus and superior colliculus. Brain Research, 847,
121–123.
Birrell, J. M., & Brown, V. J. (2000). Medial frontal cortex mediates perceptual attentional set shifting in the rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 20,
4320–4324.
Bland, B. H., Konopacki, J., Kirk, I. J., Oddie, S. D., & Dickson, C. T.
(1995). Discharge patterns of hippocampal theta-related cells in the
caudal diencephalon of the urethane-anesthetized rat. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 74, 322–333.
Błasiak, T., & Lewandowski, M. H. (2013). Differential firing pattern
and response to lighting conditions of rat intergeniculate leaflet
neurons projecting to suprachiasmatic nucleus or contralateral IGL.
Neuroscience, 228, 315–324.
Błasiak, T., Siejka, S., Raison, S., Pevet, P., & Lewandowski, M. H.
(2006). The serotonergic inhibition of slowly bursting cells in the
intergeniculate leaflet of the rat. European Journal of Neuroscience, 24,
2769–2780.
Block, A. E., Dhanji, H., Thompson-Tardif, S. F., & Floresco, S. B. (2007).
Thalamic-prefrontal cortical-ventral striatal circuitry mediates dissociable components of strategy set shifting. Cerebral Cortex, 17,
1625–1636.
Blomqvist, A., Ericson, A. C., Broman, J., & Craig, A. D. (1992). Electron microscopic identification of lamina I axon terminations in the
nucleus submedius of the cat thalamus. Brain Research, 585, 425–430.
Bodor, A. L., Giber, K., Rovó, Z., Ulbert, I., & Acsády, L. (2008). Structural correlates of efficient GABAergic transmission in the basal
ganglia-thalamus pathway. Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 3090–3102.
Bokor, H., Acsády, L., & Deschênes, M. (2008). Vibrissal responses of
thalamic cells that project to the septal columns of the barrel cortex
and to the second somatosensory area. Journal of Neuroscience, 28,
5169–5177.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

376

16. THALAMUS

Bokor, H., Csáki, A., Kocsis, K., & Kiss, J. (2002). Cellular architecture of
the nucleus reuniens thalami and its putative aspartatergic/glutamatergic projection to the hippocampus and medial septum in the
rat. European Journal of Neuroscience, 16, 1227–1239.
Bokor, H., Frère, S. G., Eyre, M. D., Slézia, A., Ulbert, I., Lüthi, A.,
et al. (2005). Selective GABAergic control of higher-order thalamic
relays. Neuron, 45, 929–940.
Bordi, F., & LeDoux, J. E. (1994a). Response properties of single units in
areas of auditory thalamus that project to the amygdala. I. Acoustic discharge patterns and frequency receptive fields. Experimental
Brain Research, 98, 261–274.
Bordi, F., & LeDoux, J. E. (1994b). Response properties of single units
in areas of rat auditory thalamus that project to the amygdala. II.
Cells receiving convergent auditory and somatosensory inputs and
cells antidromically activated by amygdala stimulation. Experimental Brain Research, 98, 275–286.
Born, G., & Schmidt, M. (2007). GABAergic pathways in the rat subcortical visual system: a comparative study in vivo and in vitro. European Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 1183–1192.
Born, G., & Schmidt, M. (2008). A reciprocal connection between the
ventral lateral geniculate nucleus and the pretectal nuclear complex
and the superior colliculus: an in vitro characterization in the rat.
Visual Neuroscience, 25, 39–51.
Bosman, L. W., Houweling, A. R., Owens, C. B., Tanke, N., Shevchouk,
O. T., Rahmati, N., et al. (2011). Anatomical pathways involved in
generating and sensing rhythmic whisker movements. Frontiers in
Integrative Neuroscience, 5, 53.
Bourassa, J., & Deschênes, M. (1995). Corticothalamic projections from
the primary visual cortex in rats: a single fiber study using biocytin
as an anterograde tracer. Neuroscience, 66, 253–263.
Bourassa, J., Pinault, D., & Deschênes, M. (1995). Corticothalamic projections from the cortical barrel field to the somatosensory thalamus
in rats: A single-fibre study using biocytin as an anterograde tracer.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 7, 19–30.
Brecht, M., & Sakmann, B. (2002). Dynamic representation of whisker
deflection by synaptic potentials in spiny stellate and pyramidal
cells in the barrels and septa of layer 4 rat somatosensory cortex.
Journal of Physiology, 543, 49–70.
Broadbent, N. J., Squire, L. R., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Reversible hippocampal lesions disrupt water maze performance during both recent
and remote memory tests. Learning and Memory, 13, 187–191.
Brog, J. S., Salyapongse, A., Deutch, A. Y., & Zahm, D. S. (1993). The
patterns of afferent innervation of the core and shell in the “accumbens” part of the rat ventral striatum: immunohistochemical detection of retrogradely transported fluoro-gold. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 338, 255–278.
Bubser, M., & Deutch, A. Y. (1998). Thalamic paraventricular nucleus
neurons collateralize to innervate the prefrontal cortex and nucleus
accumbens. Brain Research, 787, 304–310.
Bubser, M., & Deutch, A. Y. (1999). Stress induces Fos expression in
neurons of the thalamic paraventricular nucleus that innervate limbic forebrain sites. Synapse, 32, 13–22.
Burcham, K. J., Corwin, J. V., Stoll, M. L., & Reep, R. L. (1997). Disconnection of medial agranular and posterior parietal cortex produces
multimodal neglect in rats. Behavioural Brain Research, 86, 41–47.
Burk, J. A., & Mair, R. G. (2001). Effects of intralaminar thalamic lesions
on sensory attention and motor intention in the rat: A comparison
with lesions involving frontal cortex and hippocampus. Behavioural
Brain Research, 123, 49–63.
Burstein, R., Dado, R. J., & Giesler, G. J., Jr. (1990). The cells of origin
of the spinothalamic tract of the rat: A quantitative reexamination.
Brain Research, 511, 329–337.
Byatt, G., & Dalrymple-Alford, J. C. (1996). Both anteromedial and
anteroventral thalamic lesions impair radial-maze learning in rats.
Behavioral Neuroscience, 110, 1335–1348.

Cacucci, F., Lever, C., Wills, T. J., Burgess, N., & O’Keefe, J. (2004).
Theta-modulated place by-direction cells in the hippocampal formation in the rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 24, 8265–8827.
Campeau, S., Akil, H., & Watson, S. J. (1997). Lesions of the medial
geniculate nuclei specifically block corticosterone release and
induction of c-fos mRNA in the forebrain associated with audiogenic stress in rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 5979–5992.
Campeau, S., & Davis, M. (1995). Involvement of subcortical and cortical afferents to the lateral nucleus of the amygdala in fear conditioning measured with fear-potentiated startle in rats trained
concurrently with auditory and visual conditioned stimuli. Journal
of Neuroscience, 15, 2312–2327.
Campeau, S., & Watson, S. J., Jr. (2000). Connections of some auditoryresponsive posterior thalamic nuclei putatively involved in activation of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical axis in response
to audiogenic stress in rats: An anterograde and retrograde tract
tracing study combined with Fos expression. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 423, 474–491.
Canteras, N. S., & Goto, M. (1999). Connections of the precommissural
nucleus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 408, 23–45.
Canteras, N. S., & Swanson, L. W. (1992). Projections of the ventral
subiculum to the amygdala, septum, and hypothalamus: a PHAL
anterograde tract-tracing study in the rat. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 324, 180–194.
Canteras, N. S., Simerly, R. B., & Swanson, L. W. (1995). Organization of projections from the medial nucleus of the amygdala:
a PHAL study in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 360,
213–245.
Card, J. P., & Moore, R. Y. (1989). Organization of lateral geniculatehypothalamic connections in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 284, 135–147.
Carleton, A., Accolla, R., & Simon, S. A. (2010). Coding in the mammalian gustatory system. Trends Neuroscience, 33, 326–334.
Carr, D. B., & Sesack, S. R. (1996). Hippocampal afferents to the rat prefrontal cortex: synaptic targets and relation to dopamine terminals.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 369, 1–15.
Carter, D. A., & Fibiger, H. C. (1978). The projections of the entopeduncular nucleus and globus pallidus in rat as demonstrated by autoradiography and horseradish peroxidase histochemistry. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 177, 113–123.
Cassel, J. C., Pereira de Vasconcelos, A., Loureiro, M., Cholvin, T., Dalrymple-Alford, J. C., & Vertes, R. P. (2013). The reuniens and rhomboid nuclei: neuroanatomy, electrophysiological characteristics and
behavioral implications. Progress in Neurobiology, 111, 34–52.
Cavdar, S., Onat, F., Cakmak, Y. O., Saka, E., Yananli, H. R., & Aker, R.
(2006). Connections of the zona incerta to the reticular nucleus of
the thalamus in the rat. Journal of Anatomy, 209, 251–258.
Cavdar, S., Onat, F. Y., Cakmak, Y. O., Yananli, H. R., Gülçebi, M., &
Aker, R. (2008). The pathways connecting the hippocampal formation, the thalamic reuniens nucleus and the thalamic reticular
nucleus in the rat. Journal of Anatomy, 212, 249–256.
Cavdar, S., Onat, F. Y., Yananli, H. R., Sehirli, U. S., Tulay, C., Saka, E.,
et al. (2002). Cerebellar connections to the rostral reticular nucleus
of the thalamus in the rat. Journal of Anatomy, 201, 485–491.
Cebrián, C., Parent, A., & Prensa, L. (2005). Patterns of axonal
branching of neurons of the substantia nigra pars reticulata and
pars lateralis in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 492,
349–369.
Cebrián, C., & Prensa, L. (2010). Basal ganglia and thalamic input from
neurons located within the ventral tier cell cluster region of the substantia nigra pars compacta in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 518, 1283–1300.
Cechetto, D. F., & Saper, C. B. (1987). Evidence for a viscerotopic sensory representation in the cortex and thalamus in the rat. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 262, 27–45.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

References

Cetas, J. S., de Venecia, R. K., & McMullen, N. T. (1999). Thalamocortical afferents of Lorente de No: medial geniculate axons that project
to primary auditory cortex have collateral branches to layer I. Brain
Research, 830, 203–208.
Chakrabarti, S., Zhang, M., & Alloway, K. D. (2008). MI neuronal
responses to peripheral whisker stimulation: relationship to neuronal activity in SI barrels and septa. Journal of Neurophysiology, 100,
50–63.
Chastrette, N., Pfaff, D. W., & Gibbs, R. B. (1991). Effects of daytime
and nighttime stress on Fos like immunoreactivity in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, the habenula, and the posterior paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus. Brain Research, 563,
339–344.
Cheatwood, J. L., Corwin, J. V., & Reep, R. L. (2005). Overlap and interdigitation of cortical and thalamic afferents to dorsocentral striatum in the rat. Brain Research, 1036, 90–100.
Cheatwood, J. L., Reep, R. L., & Corwin, J. V. (2003). The associative
striatum: cortical and thalamic projections to the dorsocentral striatum in rats. Brain Research, 968, 1–14.
Chen, S., & Su, H.-S. (1990). Afferent connections of the thalamic paraventricular and parataenial nuclei in the rat—A retrograde tracing
study with iontophoretic application of fluoro-gold. Brain Research,
522, 1–6.
Chiaia, N. L., Rhoades, R. W., Bennett-Clarke, C. A., Fish, S. E., &
Killackey, H. P. (1991a). Thalamic processing of vibrissal information in the rat. I. Afferent input to the medial ventral posterior and
posterior nuclei. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 314, 201–216.
Chiaia, N. L., Rhoades, R. W., Fish, S. E., & Killackey, H. P. (1991b). Thalamic processing of vibrissal information in the rat. II. Morphological and functional properties of medial ventral posterior nucleus
and posterior nucleus neurons. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
314, 217–236.
Choi, D. L., Davis, J. F., Fitzgerald, M. E., & Benoit, S. C. (2010). The role
of orexin-A in food motivation, reward-based feeding behavior and
food-induced neuronal activation in rats. Neuroscience, 167, 11–20.
Choi, D. L., Davis, J. F., Magrisso, I. J., Fitzgerald, M. E., Lipton, J. W.,
& Benoit, S. C. (2012). Orexin signaling in the paraventricular thalamic nucleus modulates mesolimbic dopamine and hedonic feeding in the rat. Neuroscience, 210, 243–248.
Cholvin, T., Loureiro, M., Cassel, R., Cosquer, B., Geiger, K., De Sa
Nogueira, D., et al. (2013). The ventral midline thalamus contributes
to strategy shifting in a memory task requiring both prefrontal cortical and hippocampal functions. Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 8772–8783.
Chudasama, Y., Passetti, F., Rhodes, S. E., Lopian, D., Desai, A., &
Robbins, T. W. (2003). Dissociable aspects of performance on the
5-choice serial reaction time task following lesions of the dorsal
anterior cingulate, infralimbic and orbitofrontal cortex in the rat:
differential effects on selectivity, impulsivity and compulsivity.
Behavioural Brain Research, 146, 105–119.
Clark, R. E., Broadbent, N. J., & Squire, L. R. (2005). Hippocampus and
remote spatial memory in rats. Hippocampus, 15, 260–272.
Clerici, W. J., & Coleman, J. R. (1990). Anatomy of the rat medial geniculate body. I. Cytoarchitecture, myeloarchitecture, and neocortical
connectivity. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 297, 14–31.
Cliffer, K. D., Burstein, R., & Giesler, G. J., Jr. (1991). Distributions of
spinothalamic, spinohypothalamic, and spinotelencephalic fibers
revealed by anterograde transport of PHA-L in rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 11, 852–868.
Coffield, J. A., Bowen, K. K., & Miletic, V. (1992). Retrograde tracing
of projections between the nucleus submedius, the ventrolateral
orbital cortex, and the midbrain in the rat. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 321, 488–499.
Coleman, K. A., & Mitrofanis, J. (1996). Organization of the visual reticular thalamic nucleus of the rat. European Journal of Neuroscience, 8,
388–404.

377

Coleman, K. A., & Mitrofanis, J. (1999). Does the perireticular thalamic
nucleus project to the neocortex? Anatomy and Embryology (Berlin),
200, 521–531.
Condé, F., Audinat, E., Maire-Lepoivre, E., & Crepel, F. (1990). Afferent
connections of the medial frontal cortex of the rat: A study using
retrograde transport of fluorescent dyes. I. Thalamic afferents. Brain
Research Bulletin, 24, 341–354.
Condé, F., Maire-Lepoivre, E., Audinat, E., & Crépel, F. (1995). Afferent
connections of the medial frontal cortex of the rat. II. Cortical and
subcortical afferents. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 352, 567–593.
Conte, W. L., Kamishina, H., Corwin, J. V., & Reep, R. L. (2008). Topography in the projections of lateral posterior thalamus with cingulate and medial agranular cortex in relation to circuitry for directed
attention and neglect. Brain Research, 1240, 87–95.
Contreras, D., Destexhe, A., Sejnowski, T. J., & Steriade, M. (1996). Control of spatiotemporal coherence of a thalamic oscillation by corticothalamic feedback. Science, 274, 771–774.
Coolen, L. M., Veening, J. G., Peters, D. W., & Shipley, M. T. (2003a). The
parvocellular subparafascicular thalamic nucleus: Anatomical and
functional compartmentalization. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
463, 117–131.
Coolen, L. M., Veening, J. G., Wells, A., & Shipley, M. T. (2003b). Afferent connections of the parvocellular subparafascicular thalamic
nucleus in the rat: Evidence for functional subdivisions. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 463, 132–156.
Cornwall, J., Cooper, J. D., & Phillipson, O. T. (1990). Projections to
the rostral reticular thalamic nucleus in the rat. Experimental Brain
Research, 80, 157–171.
Cornwall, J., & Phillipson, O. T. (1988). Afferent projections to the dorsal thalamus of the rat as shown by retrograde lectin transport. II.
The midline nuclei. Brain Research Bulletin, 21, 147–161.
Corwin, J. V., Fussinger, M., Meyer, R. C., King, V. R., & Reep, R. L.
(1994). Bilateral destruction of the ventrolateral orbital cortex produces allocentric but not egocentric spatial deficits in rats. Behavioural Brain Research, 61, 79–86.
Corwin, J. V., & Reep, R. L. (1998). Rodent posterior parietal cortex as
a component of a cortical network mediating directed spatial attention. Psychobiology, 26, 87–102.
Cox, C. L., Huguenard, J. R., & Prince, D. A. (1996). Heterogeneous
axonal arborizations of rat thalamic reticular neurons in the ventrobasal nucleus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 366, 416–430.
Crabtree, J. W. (1999). Intrathalamic sensory connections mediated by
the thalamic reticular nucleus. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences,
56, 683–700.
Crabtree, J. W., Collingridge, G. L., & Isaac, J. T. R. (1998). A new
intrathalamic pathway linking modality-related nuclei in the dorsal
thalamus. Nature Neuroscience, 1, 389–394.
Crabtree, J. W., & Isaac, J. T. R. (2002). New intrathalamic pathways
allowing modality-related and cross-modality switching in the dorsal thalamus. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 8754–8761.
Craig, A. D., & Burton, H. (1981). Spinal and medullary lamina I projection to nucleus submedius in medial thalamus: A possible pain
center. Journal of Neurophysiology, 45, 329–346.
Crick, F. (1984). Function of the thalamic reticular complex: The searchlight hypothesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 81, 4586–4590.
Cross, L., Brown, M. W., Aggleton, J. P., & Warburton, E. C. (2012).
The medial dorsal thalamic nucleus and the medial prefrontal cortex of the rat function together to support associative recognition
and recency but not item recognition. Learning and Memory, 20,
41–50.
Cullinan, W. E., & Zaborszky, L. (1991). Organization of ascending
hypothalamic projections to the rostral forebrain with special reference to the innervation of cholinergic projection neurons. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 306, 631–667.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

378

16. THALAMUS

Dado, R. J., & Giesler, G. J., Jr. (1990). Afferent input to nucleus submedius in rats: Retrograde labeling of neurons in the spinal cord and
caudal medulla. Journal of Neuroscience, 10, 2672–2686.
Dado, R. J., Katter, J. T., & Giesler, G. J., Jr. (1994). Spinothalamic and
spinohypothalamic tract neurons in the cervical enlargement of
rats. I. Locations of antidromically identified axons in the thalamus
and hypothalamus. Journal of Neurophysiology, 71, 959–980.
Davoodi, F. G., Motamedi, F., Akbari, E., Ghanbarian, E., & Jila, B. (2011).
Effect of reversible inactivation of reuniens nucleus on memory processing in passive avoidance task. Behavioural Brain Research, 221, 1–6.
Davoodi, F. G., Motamedi, F., Naghdi, N., & Akbari, E. (2009). Effect of
reversible inactivation of the reuniens nucleus on spatial learning
and memory in rats using Morris water maze task. Behavioural Brain
Research, 198, 130–135.
De Biasi, S., Amadeo, A., Spreafico, R., & Rustioni, A. (1994). Enrichment of glutamate immunoreactivity in lemniscal terminals in the
ventroposterolateral thalamic nucleus of the rat: An immunogold
and WGA–HRP study. Anatomical Record, 240, 131–140.
Deniau, J. M., & Chevalier, G. (1992). The lamellar organization of the
rat substantia nigra pars reticulata: Distribution of projection neurons. Neuroscience, 46, 361–377.
Deniau, J. M., Kita, H., & Kitai, S. T. (1992). Patterns of termination of
cerebellar and basal ganglia efferents in the rat thalamus: Strictly
segregated and partly overlapping projections. Neuroscience Letters,
144, 202–206.
Deniau, J. M., Menetrey, A., & Charpier, S. (1996). The lamellar organization of the rat substantia nigra pars reticulata: Segregated patterns of striatal afferents and relationship to the topography of
corticostriatal projections. Neuroscience, 73, 71–781.
Deniau, J. M., Menetrey, A., & Thierry, A. M. (1994). Indirect nucleus
accumbens input to the prefrontal cortex via the substantia nigra
pars reticulata: A combined anatomical and electrophysiological
study in the rat. Neuroscience, 61, 533–545.
Derdikman, D., Yu, C., Haidarliu, S., Bagdasarian, K., Arieli, A., &
Ahissar, E. (2006). Layer specific touch dependent facilitation and
depression in the somatosensory cortex during active whisking.
Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 9538–9547.
Desbois, C., & Villanueva, L. (2001). The organization of lateral ventromedial thalamic connections in the rat: A link for the distribution
of nociceptive signals to widespread cortical regions. Neuroscience,
102, 885–898.
Deschênes, M., Bourassa, J., Doan, V. D., & Parent, A. (1996). A single-cell
study of the axonal projections arising from the posterior intralaminar
thalamic nuclei in the rat. European Journal of Neuroscience, 8, 329–343.
Deschênes, M., Bourassa, J., & Pinault, D. (1994). Corticothalamic projections from layer V cells in rat are collaterals of long-range corticofugal axons. Brain Research, 664, 215–219.
Deschênes, M., Veinante, P., & Zhang, Z. W. (1998). The organization
of corticothalamic projections: Reciprocity versus parity. Brain
Research Review, 28, 286–308.
Desilets-Roy, B., Varga, C., Lavallée, P., & Deschênes, M. (2002). Substrate for cross-talk inhibition between thalamic barreloids. Journal
of Neuroscience, 22, RC218.
Diamond, M. E., von Heimendahl, M., Knutsen, P. M., Kleinfeld, D., &
Ahissar, E. (2008). “Where” and “what” in the whisker sensorimotor system. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9, 601–612.
Dias, R., & Aggleton, J. P. (2000). Effects of selective excitotoxic prefrontal lesions on acquisition of nonmatching- and matching-to-place
in the T-maze in the rat: differential involvement of the prelimbicinfralimbic and anterior cingulate cortices in providing behavioural
flexibility. European Journal of Neuroscience, 12, 4457–4466.
Dolleman-van der Weel, M. J., Lopes da Silva, F. H., & Witter, M. P.
(1997). Nucleus reuniens thalami modulates activity in hippocampal field CA1 through excitatory and inhibitory mechanisms. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 5640–5650.

Dolleman-van der Weel, M. J., Morris, R. G., & Witter, M. P. (2009).
Neurotoxic lesions of the thalamic reuniens or mediodorsal nucleus
in rats affect non-mnemonic aspects of watermaze learning. Brain
Structure and Function, 213, 329–342.
Dolleman-van der Weel, M. J., & Witter, M. P. (1996). Projections from
the nucleus reuniens thalami to the entorhinal cortex, hippocampal field CA1, and the subiculum in the rat arise from different
populations of neurons. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 364,
637–650.
Donishi, T., Kimura, A., Okamoto, K., & Tamai, Y. (2006). “Ventral” area
in the rat auditory cortex: a major auditory field connected with
the dorsal division of the medial geniculate body. Neuroscience, 141,
1553–1567.
Doron, N. N., & LeDoux, J. E. (1999). Organization of projections to the
lateral amygdala from auditory and visual areas of the thalamus in
the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 412, 383–409.
Doron, N. N., & LeDoux, J. E. (2000). Cells in the posterior thalamus
project to both amygdala and temporal cortex: A quantitative retrograde double-labeling study in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 425, 257–274.
Dostrovsky, J. O., & Guilbaud, G. (1988). Noxious stimuli excite neurons in nucleus submedius of the normal and arthritic rat. Brain
Research, 460, 269–280.
Eaton, S. A., & Salt, T. E. (1996). Role of N-methyl-D-aspartate and
metabotropic glutamate receptors in corticothalamic excitatory
postsynaptic potentials. in vivo. Neuroscience, 73, 1–5.
Eichenbaum, H., Shedlack, K. J., & Eckmann, K. W. (1980). Thalamocortical mechanisms in odor-guided behavior. I. Effects of lesions
of the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus and frontal cortex on olfactory discrimination in the rat. Brain, Behavior and Evolution, 17,
255–275.
Eleore, L., López-Ramos, J. C., Guerra-Narbona, R., & Delgado-García,
J. M. (2011). Role of reuniens nucleus projections to the medial prefrontal cortex and to the hippocampal pyramidal CA1 area in associative learning. PLoS One, 6, e23538.
Ennaceur, A., Neave, N., & Aggleton, J. P. (1996). Neurotoxic lesions of
the perirhinal cortex do not mimic the behavioural effects of fornix
transection in the rat. Behavioural Brain Research, 80, 9–25.
Ericson, A. C., Blomqvist, A., Craig, A. D., Ottersen, O. P., & Broman,
J. (1995). Evidence for glutamate as neurotransmitter in trigeminoand spinothalamic tract terminals in the nucleus submedius of cats.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 7, 305–317.
Ericson, A. C., Blomqvist, A., Krout, K., & Craig, A. D. (1996). Fine
structural organization of spinothalamic and trigeminothalamic
lamina I terminations in the nucleus submedius of the cat. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 371, 497–512.
Erro, M. E., Lanciego, J. L., & Gimenez-Amaya, J. M. (2002). Re-examination of the thalamostriatal projections in the rat with retrograde
tracers. Neuroscience Research, 42, 45–55.
Fanselow, E. E., Sameshima, K., Baccala, L. A., & Nicolelis, M. A. (2001).
Thalamic bursting in rats during different awake behavioral states.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the United States of
America, 98, 15330–15335.
Faull, R. M., & Mehler, W. R. (1985). Thalamus. In G. Paxinos (Ed.), The
Rat Nervous System (pp. 122–168). New York: Academic Press.
Ferino, F., Thierry, A. M., & Glowinski, J. (1987). Anatomical and electrophysiological evidence for a direct projection from Ammon’s
horn to the medial prefrontal cortex in the rat. Experimental Brain
Research, 65, 421–426.
Ferrarelli, F., & Tononi, G. (2011). The thalamic reticular nucleus and
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37, 306–315.
Floresco, S. B., Magyar, O., Ghods-Sharifi, S., Vexelman, C., & Tse, M. T.
(2006). Multiple dopamine receptor subtypes in the medial prefrontal cortex of the rat regulate set-shifting. Neuropsychopharmacology,
31, 297–309.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

References

Francis, J. T., Xu, S., & Chapin, J. K. (2008). Proprioceptive and cutaneous representations in the rat ventral posterolateral thalamus. Journal of Neurophysiology, 99, 2291–2304.
Fu, J. J., Tang, J. S., Yuan, B., & Jia, H. (2002). Response of neurons in
the thalamic nucleus submedius (Sm) to noxious stimulation and
electrophysiological identification of on- and off-cells in rats. Pain,
99, 243–251.
Fuentealba, P., & Steriade, M. (2005). The reticular nucleus revisited:
intrinsic and network properties of a thalamic pacemaker. Progress
in Neurobiology, 75, 125–141.
Furuta, T., Kaneko, T., & Deschênes, M. (2009). Septal neurons in barrel
cortex derive their receptive field input from the lemniscal pathway. Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 4089–4095.
Gabbott, P. L., & Bacon, S. J. (1994). Two types of interneuron in the
dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the rat: A combined NADPH
diaphorase histochemical and GABA immunocytochemical study.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 350, 281–301.
Gabbott, P. L., Warner, T. A., Jays, P. R., Salway, P., & Busby, S. J. (2005).
Prefrontal cortex in the rat: projections to subcortical autonomic,
motor, and limbic centers. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 492,
145–177.
Gaffan, D. (1992). The role of the hippocampal-fornix-mammillary system in episodic memory. In L. S. Squire, & N. Butters (Eds.), Neuropsychology of Memory (pp. 336–346). New York: Guildford Press.
García-Cabezas, M. A., Martínez-Sánchez, P., Sánchez-González, M.
A., Garzón, M., & Cavada, C. (2009). Dopamine innervation in the
thalamus: monkey versus rat. Cerebral Cortex, 19, 424–434.
Gauriau, C., & Bernard, J. F. (2004). A comparative reappraisal of projections from the superficial laminae of the dorsal horn in the rat:
the forebrain. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 468, 24–56.
Giber, K., Slézia, A., Bokor, H., Bodor, A. L., Ludányi, A., Katona, I.,
et al. (2008). Heterogeneous output pathways link the anterior pretectal nucleus with the zona incerta and the thalamus in rat. Journal
of Comparative Neurology, 506, 122–140.
Gold, J. J., & Squire, L. R. (2006). The anatomy of amnesia: neurohistological analysis of three new cases. Learning and Memory, 13,
699–710.
Golob, E. J., Wolk, D. A., & Taube, J. S. (1998). Recordings of postsubiculum head direction cells following lesions of the laterodorsal
thalamic nulcleus. Brain Research, 780, 9–19.
Golshani, P., Liu, X. B., & Jones, E. G. (2001). Differences in quantal
amplitude reflect GluR4-subunit number at corticothalamic synapses on two populations of thalamic neurons. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 98,
4172–4177.
Gonzalo, N., Lanciego, J. L., Castle, M., Vázquez, A., Erro, E., & Obeso,
J. A. (2002). The parafascicular thalamic complex and basal ganglia
circuitry: Further complexity to the basal ganglia model. Thalamus
and Related Systems, 1, 341–348.
Gonzalo-Ruiz, A., & Lieberman, A. R. (1995). GABAergic projections from the thalamic reticular nucleus to the anteroventral and
anterodorsal thalamic nuclei of the rat. Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy, 9, 165–174.
Gonzalo-Ruiz, A., Sanz-Anquela, M. J., & Lieberman, A. R. (1995).
Cholinergic projections to the anterior thalamic nuclei in the rat:
A combined retrograde tracing and choline acetyltransferase
immunohistochemical study. Anatomy and Embryology (Berlin), 192,
335–349.
Goodridge, J. P., & Taube, J. S. (1997). Interaction between the postsubiculum and anterior thalamus in the generation of head direction
cell activity. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 9315–9330.
Goto, M., & Swanson, L. W. (2004). Axonal projections from the parasubthalamic nucleus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 469, 581–607.
Goto, M., Swanson, L. W., & Canteras, N. S. (2001). Connections of the
nucleus incertus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 438, 86–122.

379

Groenewegen, H. J. (1988). Organization of the afferent connections of
the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus in the rat, related to the mediodorsal-prefrontal topography. Neuroscience, 24, 379–431.
Groenewegen, H. J., & Berendse, H. W. (1994). The specificity of the
“non-specific” midline and intralaminar thalamic nuclei. Trends in
Neurosciences, 17, 52–57.
Groenewegen, H. J., Berendse, H. W., Wolters, J. G., & Lohman, A. H. M.
(1990). The anatomical relationship of the prefrontal cortex with the
striatopallidal system, the thalamus and the amygdala: Evidence for
a parallel organization. Progress in Brain Research, 85, 95–118.
Groenewegen, H. J., Galis-de Graaf, Y., & Smeets, W. J. (1999). Integration and segregation of limbic cortico-striatal loops at the thalamic
level: An experimental tracing study in rats. Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy, 16, 167–185.
Groenewegen, H. J., Vermeulen-Van der Zee, E., te Kortschot, A., &
Witter, M. P. (1987). Organization of the projections from the subiculum to the ventral striatum in the rat. A study using anterograde
transport of Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin. Neuroscience, 23,
103–120.
Groenewegen, H. J., & Witter, M. P. (2004). Thalamus. In G. Paxinos
(Ed.), The Rat Nervous System (3rd ed.) (pp. 408–441). San Diego:
Academic Press.
Guandalini, P. (2001). The efferent connections to the thalamus and
brainstem of the physiologically defined eye field in the rat medial
frontal cortex. Brain Research Bulletin, 54, 175–186.
Guido, W., Lu, S. M., Vaughan, J. W., Godwin, D. W., & Sherman, S.
M. (1995). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis of neurons in the cat’s lateral geniculate nucleus during tonic and burst
response mode. Visual Neuroscience, 12, 723–741.
Guido, W., & Weyand, T. (1995). Burst responses in thalamic relay cells
of the awake behaving cat. Journal of Neurophysiology, 74, 1782–1786.
Guillery, R. W. (1995). Anatomical evidence concerning the role of the
thalamus in corticocortical communication: A brief review. Journal
of Anatomy, 187, 583–592.
Guillery, R. W., Feig, S. L., & Lozsadi, D. A. (1998). Paying attention
to the thalamic reticular nucleus. Trends in Neuroscience, 21, 28–32.
Gulcebi, M. I., Ketenci, S., Linke, R., Hacioglu, H., Yanali, H., Veliskova, J., et al. (2012). Topographical connections of the substantia
nigra pars reticulata to higher-order thalamic nuclei in the rat. Brain
Research Bulletin, 87, 312–318.
Haber, S. N., & Calzavara, R. (2009). The cortico-basal ganglia integrative
network: the role of the thalamus. Brain Research Bulletin, 78, 69–74.
Haidarliu, S., & Ahissar, E. (2001). Size gradients of barreloids in the rat
thalamus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 429, 372–387.
Haidarliu, S., Yu, C., Rubin, N., & Ahissar, E. (2008). Lemniscal and
extralemniscal compartments in the VPM of the rat. Frontiers in
Neuroanatomy, 2, 4.
Hallanger, A. E., Levey, A. I., Lee, H. J., Rye, D. B., & Wainer, B. H.
(1987). The origins of cholinergic and other subcortical afferents
to the thalamus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 262,
105–124.
Halsell, C. B. (1992). Organization of parabrachial nucleus efferents to
the thalamus and amygdala in the golden hamster. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 317, 57–78.
Hamlin, A. S., Clemens, K. J., Choi, E. A., & McNally, G. P. (2009).
Paraventricular thalamus mediates context-induced reinstatement
(renewal) of extinguished reward seeking. European Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 802–812.
Han, J. H., Yiu, A. P., Cole, C. J., Hsiang, H. L., Neve, R. L., & Josselyn,
S. A. (2008). Increasing CREB in the auditory thalamus enhances
memory and generalization of auditory conditioned fear. Learning
and Memory, 15, 443–453.
Harding, A., Halliday, G., Caine, D., & Kril, J. (2000). Degeneration
of anterior thalamic nuclei differentiates alcoholics with amnesia.
Brain, 123, 141–154.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

380

16. THALAMUS

Haroian, A. J., Massopust, L. C., & Young, P. A. (1981). Cerebellothalamic projections in the rat: An autoradiographic and degeneration
study. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 197, 217–236.
Harrington, M. E. (1997). The ventral lateral geniculate nucleus and the
intergeniculate leaflet: Interrelated structures in the visual and circadian systems. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 21, 705–727.
Harris, R. M., & Hendrickson, A. E. (1987). Local circuit neurons in the
rat ventrobasal thalamus—A GABA immunocytochemical study.
Neuroscience, 21, 229–236.
Hartings, J. A., Temereanca, S., & Simons, D. J. (2000). High responsiveness and direction sensitivity of neurons in the rat thalamic
reticular nucleus to vibrissa deflections. Journal of Neurophysiology,
83, 2791–2801.
Hayakawa, T., & Zyo, K. (1989). Retrograde double-labeling study of
the mammillothalamic and the mammillotegmental projections in
the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 284, 1–11.
Hayama, T., Hashimoto, K., & Ogawa, H. (1994). Anatomical location
of a taste-related region in the thalamic reticular nucleus in rats.
Neuroscience Research, 18, 291–299.
Hayama, T., & Ogawa, H. (1997). Regional differences of callosal connections in the granular zones of the primary somatosensory cortex
in rats. Brain Research Bulletin, 43, 341–347.
Hazama, M., Kimura, A., Donishi, T., Sakoda, T., & Tamai, Y. (2004).
Topography of corticothalamic projections from the auditory cortex
of the rat. Neuroscience, 124, 655–667.
He, J. (2003). Corticofugal modulation of the auditory thalamus. Experimental Brain Research, 153, 579–590.
Hembrook, J. R., & Mair, R. G. (2011). Lesions of reuniens and rhomboid thalamic nuclei impair radial maze win-shift performance.
Hippocampus, 21, 815–826.
Hembrook, J. R., Onos, K. D., & Mair, R. G. (2012). Inactivation of ventral
midline thalamus produces selective spatial delayed conditional discrimination impairment in the rat. Hippocampus, 22, 853–860.
Herkenham, M. (1978). The connections of the nucleus reuniens thalami: Evidence for a direct thalamo-hippocampal pathway in the
rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 177, 589–610.
Herkenham, M. (1979). The afferent and efferent connections of the
ventromedial thalamic nucleus in the rat. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 183, 487–517.
Hermanson, O., Hallbeck, M., & Blomqvist, A. (1995). Preproenkephalin mRNA-expressing neurones in the rat thalamus. NeuroReport,
6, 833–836.
Heydendael, W., Sharma, K., Iyer, V., Luz, S., Piel, D., Beck, S., et al.
(2011). Orexins/hypocretins act in the posterior paraventricular
thalamic nucleus during repeated stress to regulate facilitation to
novel stress. Endocrinology, 152, 4738–4752.
Hickey, T. L., & Spear, P. D. (1976). Retinogeniculate projections in
hooded and albino rats: An autoradiographic study. Experimental
Brain Research, 24, 523–529.
Hicks, R. R., & Huerta, M. F. (1991). Differential thalamic connectivity
of rostral and caudal parts of cortical area Fr2 in rats. Brain Research,
568, 325–329.
Hoogland, P. V., Welker, E., & Van der, L. H. (1987). Organization of
the projections from barrel cortex to thalamus in mice studied with
Phaseolus vulgaris-leucoagglutinin and HRP. Experimental Brain
Research, 68, 73–87.
Hoogland, P. V., Wouterlood, F. G., Welker, E., & Van der, L. H. (1991).
Ultrastructure of giant and small thalamic terminals of cortical origin: A study of the projections from the barrel cortex in mice using
Phaseolus vulgaris leuco-agglutinin (PHA-L). Experimental Brain
Research, 87, 159–172.
Hooks, B. M., Mao, T., Gutnisky, D. A., Yamawaki, N., Svoboda, K., &
Shepherd, G. M. (2013). Organization of cortical and thalamic input
to pyramidal neurons in mouse motor cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 748–760.

Hoover, W. B., & Vertes, R. P. (2007). Anatomical analysis of afferent
projections to the medial prefrontal cortex in the rat. Brain Structure
and Function, 212, 149–179.
Hoover, W. B., & Vertes, R. P. (2011). Projections of the medial orbital
and ventral orbital cortex in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 519, 3766–3801.
Hoover, W. B., & Vertes, R. P. (2012). Collateral projections from nucleus
reuniens of thalamus to hippocampus and medial prefrontal cortex
in the rat: a single and double retrograde fluorescent labeling study.
Brain Structure and Function, 217, 191–209.
Hopkins, D. A. (2005). Neuroanatomy of head direction cell circuits. In S.
I. Wiener, & J. S. Taube (Eds.), Head Direction Cells and the Neural Mechanisms of Spatial Orientation (pp. 17–44). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Horvath, T. L. (1998). An alternate pathway for visual signal integration into the hypothalamo-pituitary axis: Retinorecipient intergeniculate neurons project to various regions of the hypothalamus
and innervate neuroendocrine cells including those producing
dopamine. Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 1546–1558.
Hsu, D. T., Kirouac, G. J., Zubieta, J. K., & Bhatnagar, S. (2014). Contributions of the paraventricular thalamic nucleus in the regulation of
stress, motivation, and mood. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience,
8, 73.
Hunt, P. R., & Aggleton, J. P. (1998). Neurotoxic lesions of the dorsomedial thalamus impair the acquisition but not the performance
of delayed matching to place by rats: a deficit in shifting response
rules. Journal of Neuroscience, 18, 10045–10052.
Hur, E. E., & Zaborszky, L. (2005). Vglut2 afferents to the medial prefrontal and primary somatosensory cortices: a combined retrograde
tracing in situ hybridization study. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
483, 351–373.
Hurley, K. M., Herbert, H., Moga, M. M., & Saper, C. B. (1991). Efferent
projections of the infralimbic cortex of the rat. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 308, 249–276.
Igelstrom, K. M., Herbison, A. E., & Hyland, B. I. (2010). Enhanced
c-Fos expression in superior colliculus, paraventricular thalamus
and septum during learning of cue-reward association. Neuroscience, 168, 706–714.
Ishizuka, N. (2001). Laminar organization of the pyramidal cell layer of
the subiculum in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 435, 89–110.
Iwata, K., Kenshalo, D. R., Jr., Dubner, R., & Nahin, R. L. (1992). Diencephalic projections from the superficial and deep laminae of the
medullary dorsal horn in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
321, 404–420.
Jahnsen, H., & Llinas, R. (1984). Electrophysiological properties of
guinea-pig thalamic neurones: An in vitro study. Journal of Physiology, 349, 205–226.
James, M. H., Charnley, J. L., Flynn, J. R., Smith, D. W., & Dayas, C. V.
(2011). Propensity to ‘relapse” following exposure to cocaine cues
is associated with the recruitment of specific thalamic and epithalamic nuclei. Neuroscience, 199, 235–242.
James, M. H., Charnley, J. L., Jones, E., Levi, E. M., Yeoh, J. W., Flynn,
J. R., et al. (2010). Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript
(CART) signaling within the paraventricular thalamus modulates
cocaine-seeking behaviour. PLoS One, 5, e12980.
James, M. H., & Dayas, C. V. (2013). What about me…? The PVT: a role
for the paraventricular thalamus (PVT) in drug-seeking behavior.
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 7, 18.
Jasmin, L., Burkey, A. R., Granato, A., & Ohara, P. T. (2004). Rostral
agranular insular cortex and pain areas of the central nervous system: a tract-tracing study in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 468, 425–440.
Jay, T. M., & Witter, M. P. (1991). Distribution of hippocampal CA1 and
subicular efferents in the prefrontal cortex of the rat studied by
means of anterograde transport of Phaseolus vulgaris-leucoagglutinin. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 313, 574–586.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

References

Jones, B. E., & Yang, T. Z. (1985). The efferent projections from the reticular formation and the locus coeruleus studied by anterograde and
retrograde axonal transport in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 242, 56–92.
Jones, E. G. (1985). The Thalamus. New York: Plenum.
Jones, E. G. (2006). The Thalamus Re-Visited. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Jones, E. G. (2007). (2nd ed.). The Thalamus . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Kamishina, H., Conte, W. L., Patel, S. S., Tai, R. J., Corwin, J. V., & Reep,
R. L. (2009). Cortical connections of the rat lateral posterior thalamic nucleus. Brain Research, 1264, 39–56.
Kamishina, H., Yurcisin, G. H., Corwin, J. V., & Reep, R. L. (2008). Striatal projections from the rat lateral posterior thalamic nucleus. Brain
Research, 1204, 24–39.
Katter, J. T., Dado, R. J., Kostarczyk, E., & Giesler, G. J., Jr. (1996). Spinothalamic and spinohypothalamic tract neurons in the sacral spinal cord of rats. I. Locations of antidromically identified axons in
the cervical cord and diencephalon. Journal of Neurophysiology, 75,
2581–2605.
Katz, D. B., Simon, S. A., & Nicolelis, M. A. L. (2001). Dynamic and
multimodal responses of gustatory cortical neurons in awake rats.
Journal of Neuroscience, 21, 4478–4489.
Kawakita, K., Dostrovsky, J. O., Tang, J. S., & Chiang, C. Y. (1993).
Responses of neurons in the rat thalamic nucleus submedius
to cutaneous, muscle and visceral nociceptive stimuli. Pain, 55,
327–338.
Kawano, J., Krout, K. E., & Loewy, A. D. (2001). Suprachiasmatic
nucleus projections to the paraventricular thalamic nucleus of the
rat. Thalamus and Related Systems, 1, 197–202.
Kelley, A. E., Baldo, B. A., & Pratt, W. E. (2005). A proposed hypothalamicthalamic-striatal axis for the integration of energy balance, arousal,
and food reward. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 493, 72–85.
Kha, H. T., Finkelstein, D. I., Pow, D. V., Lawrence, A. J., & Horne, M. K.
(2000). Study of the projections from the entopeduncular nucleus to
the thalamus of the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 426, 366–377.
Kha, H. T., Finkelstein, D. I., Tomas, D., Drago, J., Pow, D. V., & Horne, M.
K. (2001). Projections from the subsatntia nigra pars reticulata to the
motor thalamus of the rat: Single axon reconstructions and immunohistochemical study. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 440, 20–30.
Kharazia, V. N., & Weinberg, R. J. (1994). Glutamate in thalamic fibers
terminating in layer IV of primary sensory cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 14, 6021–6032.
Kichula, E. A., & Huntley, G. W. (2008). Developmental and comparative
aspects of posterior medial thalamocortical innervation of the barrel
cortex in mice and rats. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 509, 239–258.
Killackey, H. P., & Sherman, S. M. (2003). Corticothalamic projections
from the rat primary somatosensory cortex. Journal of Neuroscience,
23, 7381–7384.
Kim, U., & Ebner, F. F. (1999). Barrels and septa: separate circuits in rat
barrels field cortex. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 408, 489–505.
Kimura, A., Donishi, T., Okamoto, K., & Tamai, Y. (2004). Efferent connections of “posterodorsal” auditory area in the rat cortex: implications for auditory spatial processing. Neuroscience, 128, 399–419.
Kimura, A., Donishi, T., Okamoto, K., & Tamai, Y. (2005). Topography
of projections from the primary and non-primary auditory cortical
areas to the medial geniculate body and thalamic reticular nucleus
in the rat. Neuroscience, 135, 1325–1342.
Kimura, A., Donishi, T., Okamoto, K., Imbe, H., & Tamai, Y. (2007a).
Efferent connections of the ventral auditory area in the cortex:
implications for auditory processing related to emotion. European
Journal of Neuroscience, 25, 2819–2834.
Kimura, A., Donishi, T., Sakoda, T., Hazama, M., & Tamai, Y. (2003).
Auditory thalamic nuclei projections to the temporal cortex in the
rat. Neuroscience, 117, 1003–1016.

381

Kimura, A., Imbe, H., & Donishi, T. (2010). Efferent connections of an
auditory area in the caudal insular cortex of the rat: anatomical
nodes for cortical streams of auditory processing and cross-modal
sensory interactions. Neuroscience, 166, 1140–1157.
Kimura, A., Imbe, H., Donishi, T., & Tamai, Y. (2007b). Axonal projections of single auditory neurons in the thalamic reticular nucleus:
implications for tonotopy-related gating function and cross-modal
modulation. European Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 3524–3535.
Kimura, A., Yokoi, I., Imbe, H., Donishi, T., & Kaneoke, Y. (2012). Auditory thalamic reticular nucleus of the rat: anatomical nodes for
modulation of auditory and cross-modal sensory processing in the
loop connectivity between the cortex and thalamus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 520, 1457–1480.
Kirifides, M. L., Simpson, K. L., Lin, R. C., & Waterhouse, B. D. (2001).
Topographic organization and neurochemical identity of dorsal
raphe neurons that project to the trigeminal somatosensory pathway in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 435, 325–340.
Kirk, I. J., Oddie, S. D., Konopacki, J., & Bland, B. H. (1996). Evidence
for differential control of posterior hypothalamic, supramammillary,
and medial mammillary theta-related cellular discharge by ascending and descending pathways. Journal of Neuroscience, 16, 5547–5554.
Kirouac, G. J., Parsons, M. P., & Li, S. (2005). Orexin (hypocretin)
innervation of the paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus. Brain
Research, 1059, 179–188.
Kirouac, G. J., Parsons, M. P., & Li, S. (2006). Innervation of the paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus from cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) containing neurons of the
hypothalamus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 497, 155–165.
Kleinfeld, D., & Deschênes, M. (2011). Neuronal basis for object location
in the vibrissa scanning sensorimotor system. Neuron, 72, 455–468.
Kobayashi, Y. (1998). Distribution and morphology of spinothalamic
tract neurons in the rat. Anatomy and Embryology (Berlin), 197, 51–67.
Kocsis, B., & Vertes, R. P. (1994). Characterization of neurons of the
supramammillary nucleus and mammillary body that discharge
rhythmically with the hippocampal theta rhythm in the rat. Journal
of Neuroscience, 14, 7040–7052.
Kocsis, B., & Vertes, R. P. (1997). Phase relations of rhythmic neuronal
firing in the supramammillary nucleus and mammillary body to
the hippocampal theta activity in urethane anesthetized rats. Hippocampus, 7, 204–214.
Kocsis, B., Viana Di Prisco, G., & Vertes, R. P. (2001). Theta synchronization in the limbic system: the role of Gudden’s tegmental nuclei.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 13, 381–388.
Koger, S. M., & Mair, R. G. (1994). Comparison of the effects of frontal
cortical and thalamic lesions on measures of olfactory learning and
memory in the rat. Behavioral Neuroscience, 108, 1088–1100.
Kolmac, C. I., & Mitrofanis, J. (1997). Organisation of the reticular thalamic projection to the intralaminar and midline nuclei in rats. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 377, 165–178.
Kolmac, C. I., & Mitrofanis, J. (2000). Organization of brainstem afferents to the ventral lateral geniculate nucleus of rats. Visual Neuroscience, 17, 313–318.
Kolmac, C. I., & Mitrofanis, J. (2001). Induction of Fos-like immunoreactivity in the ventral thalamus after electrical or chemical stimulation of various subcortical centres of rats. Neuroscience Letters, 301,
195–198.
Kolmac, C. I., Power, B. D., & Mitrofanis, J. (2000). Dorsal thalamic connections of the ventral lateral geniculate nucleus of rats. Journal of
Neurocytology, 29, 31–41.
Komura, Y., Tamura, R., Uwano, T., Nishijo, H., Kaga, K., & Ono, T.
(2001). Retrospective and prospective coding for predicted reward
in the sensory thalamus. Nature, 412, 546–549.
Kosar, E., Grill, H. J., & Norgren, R. (1986a). Gustatory cortex in the
rat. I. Physiological properties and cytoarchitecture. Brain Research,
379, 329–341.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

382

16. THALAMUS

Kosar, E., Grill, H. J., & Norgren, R. (1986b). Gustatory cortex in the rat.
II. Thalamocortical projections. Brain Research, 379, 342–352.
Krettek, J. E., & Price, J. L. (1977). The cortical projections of the mediodorsal nucleus and adjacent thalamic nuclei in the rat. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 171, 157–191.
Krieg, W. J. S. (1944). The medial region of the thalamus of the albino
rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 80, 381–415.
Krout, K. E., Belzer, R. E., & Loewy, A. D. (2002). Brainstem projections to midline and intralaminar thalamic nuclei of the rat. Journal
of Comparative Neurology, 448, 53–101.
Krout, K. E., & Loewy, A. D. (2000a). Parabrachial nucleus projections
to midline and intralaminar thalamic nuclei of the rat. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 428, 475–494.
Krout, K. E., & Loewy, A. D. (2000b). Periaqueductal gray matter projections to midline and intralaminar thalamic nuclei of the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 424, 111–141.
Krout, K. E., Loewy, A. D., Westby, G. W., & Redgrave, P. (2001). Superior colliculus projections to midline and intralaminar thalamic
nuclei of the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 431, 198–216.
Kuramoto, E., Fujiyama, F., Nakamura, K. C., Tanaka, Y., Hioki, H., &
Kaneko, T. (2011). Complementary distribution of glutamatergic
cerebellar and GABAergic basal ganglia afferents to the rat motor
thalamic nuclei. European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 95–109.
Kuramoto, E., Furuta, T., Nakamura, K. C., Unzai, T., Hioki, H., &
Kaneko, T. (2009). Two types of thalamocortical projections from
the motor thalamic nuclei of the rat: a single neuron-tracing study
using viral vectors. Cerebral Cortex, 19, 2065–2077.
Kuroda, M., Lopez-Mascaraque, L., & Price, J. L. (1992). Neuronal and
synaptic composition of the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus in the
rat: A light and electron microscopic Golgi study. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 326, 61–81.
Kuroda, M., & Price, J. L. (1991a). Synaptic organization of projections from basal forebrain structures to the mediodorsal thalamic
nucleus of the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 303, 513–533.
Kuroda, M., & Price, J. L. (1991b). Ultrastructure and synaptic organization
of axon terminals from brainstem structures to the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus of the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 313, 539–552.
Kuroda, M., Yokofujita, J., & Murakami, K. (1998). An ultrastructural study
of the neural circuit between the prefrontal cortex and the mediodorsal
nucleus of the thalamus. Progress in Neurobiology, 54, 417–458.
Kurokawa, T., & Saito, H. (1995). Retrograde axonal transport of different fluorescent tracers from the neocortex to the suprageniculate
nucleus in the rat. Hearing Research, 85, 103–108.
Lai, H., Tsumori, T., Shiroyama, T., Yokota, S., Nakano, K., & Yasui,
Y. (2000). Morphological evidence for a vestibulo-thalamo-striatal
pathway via the parafascicular nucleus in the rat. Brain Research,
872, 208–214.
Land, P. W., Buffer, S. A., Jr., & Yaskosky, J. D. (1995). Barreloids in adult
rat thalamus: Three-dimensional architecture and relationship to
somatosensory cortical barrels. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
355, 573–588.
Land, P. W., & Simons, D. J. (1985). Metabolic and structural correlates
of the vibrissae representation in the thalamus of the adult rat. Neuroscience Letters, 60, 319–324.
Landisman, C. E., Long, M. A., Beierlein, M., Deans, M. R., Paul, D. L.,
& Connors, B. W. (2002). Electrical synapses in the thalamic reticular nucleus. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 1002–1009.
Lane, R. D., Allan, D. M., Bennett-Clarke, C. A., Howell, D. L., &
Rhoades, R. W. (1997). Projection status of calbindin- and parvalbumin-immunoreactive neurons in the superficial layers of the rat’s
superior colliculus. Visual Neuroscience, 14, 277–286.
Lanuza, E., Moncho-Bogani, J., & Ledoux, J. E. (2008). Unconditioned
stimulus pathways to the amygdala: effects of lesions of the posterior intralaminar thalamus on foot-shock-induced c-Fos expression in the subdivisions of the lateral amygdala. Neuroscience, 155,
959–968.

Laroche, S., Davis, S., & Jay, T. M. (2000). Plasticity at hippocampal to
prefrontal cortex synapses: dual roles in working memory and consolidation. Hippocampus, 10, 438–446.
Lavallée, P., Urbain, N., Dufresne, C., Bokor, H., Acsády, L., &
Deschênes, M. (2005). Feedforward inhibitory control of sensory
information in higher-order thalamic nuclei. Journal of Neuroscience,
25, 7489–7498.
LeDoux, J. E. (1993). Emotional memory systems in the brain. Behavioural Brain Research, 58, 69–79.
LeDoux, J. E. (2000). Emotion circuits in the brain. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 23, 155–184.
LeDoux, J. E., Farb, C., & Ruggiero, D. A. (1990). Topographic organization of neurons in the acoustic thalamus that project to the amygdala. Journal of Neuroscience, 10, 1043–1054.
LeDoux, J. E., Ruggiero, D. A., Forest, R., Stornetta, R., & Reis, D. J.
(1987). Topographic organization of convergent projections to the
thalamus from the inferior colliculus and spinal cord in the rat.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 264, 123–146.
LeDoux, J. E., Ruggiero, D. A., & Reis, D. J. (1985). Projections to the subcortical forebrain from anatomically defined regions of the medial geniculate body in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 242, 182–213.
LeDoux, J. E., Sakaguchi, A., Iwata, J., & Reis, D. J. (1986). Interruption
of projections from the medial geniculate body to an archi-neostriatal field disrupts the classical conditioning of emotional responses
to acoustic stimuli. Neuroscience, 117, 615–627.
LeDoux, J. E., Sakaguchi, A., & Reis, D. J. (1984). Subcortical efferent projections of the medial geniculate nucleus mediate emotional responses
conditioned to acoustic stimuli. Journal of Neuroscience, 4, 683–698.
Leonard, C. M. (1969). The prefrontal cortex of the rat. I. Cortical projections of the mediodorsal nucleus. II. Efferent connections. Brain
Research, 12, 321–343.
Leonard, C. M. (1972). The connections of the dorsomedial nuclei.
Brain, Behavior and Evolution, 6, 524–541.
Levesque, M., Gagnon, S., Parent, A., & Deschênes, M. (1996). Axonal
arborizations of corticostriatal and corticothalamic fibers arising from
the second somatosensory area in the rat. Cerebral Cortex, 6, 759–770.
Li, S., & Kirouac, G. J. (2008). Projections from the paraventricular
nucleus of the thalamus to the forebrain, with special emphasis on the
extended amygdala. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 506, 263–287.
Li, S., & Kirouac, G. J. (2012). Sources of inputs to the anterior and posterior aspects of the paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus. Brain
Structure and Function, 217, 257–273.
Li, Y. Q. (1999). Substance P receptor-like immunoreactive neurons in
the caudal spinal trigeminal nucleus send axons to the gelatinosus
thalamic nucleus in the rat. Journal für Hirnforschung, 39, 277–282.
Linke, R. (1999). Differential projection patterns of superior and inferior collicular neurons onto posterior paralaminar nuclei of the
thalamus surrounding the medial geniculate body in the rat. European Journal of Neuroscience, 11, 187–203.
Linke, R., De Lima, A. D., Schwegler, H., & Pape, H. C. (1999). Direct
synaptic connections of axons from superior colliculus with identified thalamo-amygdaloid projection neurons in the rat: Possible
substrates of a subcortical visual pathway to the amygdala. Journal
of Comparative Neurology, 403, 158–170.
Linke, R., & Schwegler, H. (2000). Convergent and complementary projections of the caudal paralaminar thalamic nuclei to rat temporal
and insular cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 10, 753–771.
Lisman, J. E. (1997). Bursts as a unit of neural information: making
unreliable synapses reliable. Trends in Neuroscience, 20, 38–43.
Liu, X. B., & Jones, E. G. (1999). Predominance of corticothalamic synaptic inputs to thalamic reticular nucleus neurons in the rat. Journal
of Comparative Neurology, 414, 67–79.
Lizier, C., Spreafico, R., & Battaglia, G. (1997). Calretinin in the thalamic reticular nucleus of the rat: Distribution and relationship with
ipsilateral and contralateral efferents. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 377, 217–233.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

References

Lopez, J., Herbeaux, K., Cosquer, B., Engeln, M., Muller, C., Lazarus,
C., et al. (2012). Context-dependent modulation of hippocampal
and cortical recruitment during remote spatial memory retrieval.
Hippocampus, 22, 827–841.
Lopez, J., Wolff, M., Lecourtier, L., Cosquer, B., Bontempi, B., Dalrymple-Alford, J., et al. (2009). The intralaminar thalamic nuclei
contribute to remote spatial memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 29,
3302–3306.
Loureiro, M., Cholvin, T., Lopez, J., Merienne, N., Latreche, A., Cosquer, B., et al. (2012). The ventral midline thalamus (reuniens and
rhomboid nuclei) contributes to the persistence of spatial memory
in rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 32, 9947–9959.
Lozsadi, D. A. (1995). Organization of connections between the thalamic reticular and the anterior thalamic nuclei in the rat. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 358, 233–246.
Lu, S. M., & Lin, R. C. (1993). Thalamic afferents of the rat barrel cortex:
A light- and electron- microscopic study using Phaseolus vulgaris
leucoagglutinin as an anterograde tracer. Somatosensory and Motor
Research, 10, 1–16.
Lu, Xi-C. M., & Slotnick, B. M. (1990). Acquisition of an olfactory learning-set in rats with lesions of the thalamic mediodorsal nucleus.
Chemical Senses, 15, 713–724.
Lundy, R. F., Jr., & Norgren, R. (2004). Gustatory System. In G. Paxinos
(Ed.), The Rat Nervous System (3rd ed.) (pp. 890–921). San Diego:
Academic Press.
Luth, H. J., Winkelmann, E., & Celio, M. R. (1993). Light and electron
microscopic localization of parvalbumin, calbindin D 28k and calretinin in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the rat. Journal für
Hirnforschung, 34, 47–56.
Ma, W., & Ohara, P. T. (1987). Synaptic glomeruli in the nucleus submedius of the rat thalamus. Brain Research, 415, 331–336.
Ma, W., Peschanski, M., & Ohara, P. T. (1988). Fine structure of the dorsal part of the nucleus submedius of the rat thalamus: An anatomical study with reference to possible pain pathways. Neuroscience,
26, 147–159.
Mailly, P., Aliane, V., Groenewegen, H. J., Haber, S. N., & Deniau, J. M.
(2013). The rat prefrontostriatal system analyzed in 3D: evidence
for multiple interacting functional units. Journal of Neuroscience, 33,
5718–5727.
Mair, R. G., Burk, J. A., & Porter, M. C. (1998). Lesions of the frontal
cortex, hippocampus, and intralaminar thalamic nuclei have distinct effects on remembering in rats. Behavioral Neuroscience, 112,
772–792.
Mair, R. G., Burk, J. A., & Porter, M. C. (2003). Impairment of radial
maze delayed nonmatching after lesions of anterior thalamus and parahippocampal cortex. Behavioral Neuroscience, 117,
596–605.
Mair, R. G., Koch, J. K., Newman, J. B., Howard, J. R., & Burk, J. A.
(2002). A double dissociation within striatum between serial reaction time and radial maze delayed nonmatching performance in
rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 6756–6765.
Malmierca, M. S., Merchan, M. A., Henkel, C. K., & Oliver, D.
L. (2002). Direct projections from cochlear nuclear complex
to auditory thalamus in the rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 22,
10891–10897.
Marchant, N. J., Furlong, T. M., & McNally, G. P. (2010). Medial dorsal hypothalamus mediates the inhibition of reward seeking after
extinction. Journal of Neuroscience, 30, 14102–14115.
Maren, S., Yap, S. A., & Goosens, K. A. (2001). The amygdala is essential
for the development of neuronal plasticity in the medial geniculate
nucleus during auditory fear conditioning in rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 21, RC135.
Martin-Fardon, R., & Boutrel, B. (2012). Orexin/hypocretin (Orx/Hcrt)
transmission and drug- seeking behavior: is the paraventricular
nucleus of the thalamus (PVT) part of the drug seeking circuitry?
Fronteirs in Behavioral Neuroscience, 6, 75.

383

Martin-Fardon, R., Leos, B. N., Kerr, T. M., & Weiss, F. (2011). Administration of orexin/hypocretin (orx/hert) in the paraventricular nucleus
of the thalamus (PVT) produces cocaine-seeking: comparison with
natural reward-seeking. Society for Neuroscience. Abstract 69.10.
Masterson, S. P., Li, J., & Bickford, M. E. (2009). Synaptic organization
of the tectorecipient zone of the rat lateral posterior nucleus. Journal
of Comparative Neurology, 515, 647–663.
McAllister, J. P., & Wells, J. (1981). The structural organization of the
ventral posterolateral nucleus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 197, 271–301.
McAlonan, K., & Brown, V. J. (2002). The thalamic reticular nucleus:
more than a sensory nucleus? Neuroscientist, 8, 302–305.
McAlonan, K., Brown, V. J., & Bowman, E. M. (2000). Thalamic reticular
nucleus activation reflects attentional gating during classical conditioning. Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 8897–8901.
McAlonan, G. M., Robbins, T. W., & Everitt, B. J. (1993). Effects of
medial dorsal thalamic and ventral pallidal lesions on the acquisition of a conditioned place preference: further evidence for the
involvement of the ventral striatopallidal system in reward-related
processes. Neuroscience, 52, 605–620.
McBride, S. A., & Slotnick, B. (1997). The olfactory thalamocortical system and odor reversal learning examined using an asymmetrical
lesion paradigm in rats. Behavioral Neuroscience, 111, 1273–1284.
McCormick, D. A., & Feeser, H. R. (1990). Functional implications of
burst firing and single spike activity in lateral geniculate relay neurons. Neuroscience, 39, 103–113.
McDonald, R. J., & White, N. M. (1993). A triple dissociation of memory
systems: hippocampus, amygdala, and dorsal striatum. Behavioral
Neuroscience, 107, 3–22.
McFarland, N. R., & Haber, S. N. (2002). Thalamic relay nuclei of the
basal ganglia form both reciprocal and nonreciprocal cortical connections, linking multiple frontal cortical areas. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 8117–8132.
McKenna, J. T., & Vertes, R. P. (2004). Afferent projections to nucleus reuniens of the thalamus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 480, 115–142.
Meng, X. W., Ohara, P. T., & Ralston, H. J., III (1998). Nitric oxide
synthase containing neurons in the ventral lateral geniculate of
the rat project to the optic pretectal nuclei. Neuroscience Letters,
256, 89–92.
Menzie, J. M., Hoover, W. B., & Vertes, R. P. (2010). Afferent projections
to the paraventricular nucleus of the dorsal midline thalamus. Society for Neuroscience, Abstract 404.13.
Meredith, G. E., & Wouterlood, F. G. (1990). Hippocampal and midline
thalamic fibers and terminals in relation to the choline acetyltransferase-immunoreactive neurons in nucleus accumbens of the rat: a
light and electron microscopic study. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 296, 204–221.
Meyer, H. S., Wimmer, V. C., Hemberger, M., Bruno, R. M., de Kock, C.
P., Frick, A., et al. (2010). Cell type specific thalamic innervation in a
column of rat vibrissal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 20, 2287–2303.
Mikkelsen, J. D. (1992). The organization of the crossed geniculogeniculate pathway of the rat: A Phaseolus vulgaris-leucoagglutinin study.
Neuroscience, 48, 953–962.
Mikkelsen, J. D. (1994). Analysis of the efferent projections of the lateral
geniculate nucleus with special reference to the innervation of the
subcommissural organ and related areas. Cell Tissue Research, 277,
437–445.
Miletic, V., & Coffield, J. A. (1989). Responses of neurons in the rat
nucleus submedius to noxious and innocuous mechanical cutaneous stimulation. Somatosensory and Motor Research, 6, 567–587.
Mitchell, A. S., & Dalrymple-Alford, J. C. (2005). Dissociable memory
effects after medial thalamus lesions in the rat. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 22, 973–985.
Mitchell, A. S., & Dalrymple-Alford, J. C. (2006). Lateral and anterior
thalamic lesions impair independent memory systems. Learning
and Memory, 13, 388–396.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

384

16. THALAMUS

Mitchell, B. D., & Cauller, L. J. (2001). Corticocortical and thalamocortical projections to layer I of the frontal neocortex in rats. Brain
Research, 921, 68–77.
Mitrofanis, J. (1992). Calbindin immunoreactivity in a subset of cat thalamic reticular neurons. Journal of Neurocytology, 21, 495–505.
Mitrofanis, J., & Guillery, R. W. (1993). New views of the thalamic
reticular nucleus in the adult and the developing brain. Trends in
Neuroscience, 16, 240–245.
Mitrofanis, J., Lozsadi, D. A., & Coleman, K. A. (1995). Evidence for
a projection from the perireticular thalamic nucleus to the dorsal
thalamus in the adult rat and ferret. Journal of Neurocytology, 24,
891–902.
Mizumori, S. J., & Williams, J. D. (1993). Directionally selective mnemonic properties of neurons in the lateral dorsal nucleus of the
thalamus of rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 13, 4015–4028.
Mizumori, S. J., Miya, D. Y., & Ward, K. E. (1994). Reversible inactivation
of the lateral dorsal thalamus disrupts hippocampal place representation and impairs spatial learning. Brain Research, 644, 168–174.
Moga, M. M., Weis, R. P., & Moore, R. Y. (1995). Efferent projections of
the paraventricular thalamic nucleus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 359, 221–238.
Monconduit, L., Bourgeais, L., Bernard, J. F., Le Bars, D., & Villanueva,
L. (1999). Ventromedial thalamic neurons convey nociceptive signals from the whole body surface to the dorsolateral neocortex.
Journal of Neuroscience, 19, 9063–9072.
Monconduit, L., Bourgeais, L., Bernard, J. F., & Villanueva, L. (2003).
Convergence of cutaneous, muscular and visceral noxious
inputs onto ventromedial thalamic neurons in the rat. Pain, 103,
83–91.
Monconduit, L., & Villanueva, L. (2005). The lateral ventromedial thalamic nucleus spreads nociceptive signals from the whole body surface to layer I of the frontal cortex. European Journal of Neuroscience,
21, 3395–3402.
Montaron, M. F., Deniau, J. M., Menetrey, A., Glowinski, J., & Thierry,
A. M. (1996). Prefrontal cortex inputs of the nucleus accumbensnigro-thalamic circuit. Neuroscience, 71, 371–382.
Montero, V. M. (2000). Attentional activation of the visual thalamic
reticular nucleus depends on “top-down” inputs from the primary
visual cortex via corticogeniculate pathways. Brain Research, 864,
95–104.
Moore, R. Y., & Card, J. P. (1994). Intergeniculate leaflet: An anatomically and functionally distinct subdivision of the lateral geniculate
complex. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 344, 403–430.
Moore, R. Y., Speh, J. C., & Card, J. P. (1995). The retinohypothalamic
tract originates from a distinct subset of retinal ganglion cells. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 352, 351–366.
Moore, R. Y., Weis, R., & Moga, M. M. (2000). Efferent projections of the
intergeniculate leaflet and the ventral lateral geniculate nucleus in
the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 420, 398–418.
Moran, J. P., & Dalrymple-Alford, J. C. (2003). Perirhinal cortex and
anterior thalamic lesions: comparative effects on learning and
memory. Behavioral Neuroscience, 117, 1326–1341.
Moreau, P. H., Tsenkina, Y., Lecourtier, L., Lopez, J., Cosquer, B.,
Wolff, M., et al. (2013). Lesions of the anterior thalamic nuclei
and intralaminar thalamic nuclei: place and visual discrimination learning in the water maze. Brain Structure and Function, 218,
657–667.
Moriizumi, T., & Hattori, T. (1992). Ultrastructural morphology of projections from the medial geniculate nucleus and its adjacent region
to the basal ganglia. Brain Research Bulletin, 29, 193–198.
Morin, L. P. (2012). Neuroanatomy of the extended circadian rhythm
system. Experimental Neurology, 243, 4–20.
Morin, L. P., & Meyer-Bernstein, E. L. (1999). The ascending serotonergic system in the hamster: comparison with projections of the
dorsal and median raphe nuclei. Neuroscience, 91, 81–105.

Murphy, P. C., & Sillito, A. M. (1996). Functional morphology of the
feedback pathway from area 17 of the cat visual cortex to the lateral
geniculate nucleus. Journal of Neuroscience, 16, 1180–1192.
Naber, P. A., & Witter, M. P. (1998). Subicular efferents are organized
mostly as parallel projections: a double-labeling, retrogradetracing study in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 393,
284–297.
Nagaeva, D. V., & Akhmadeev, A. V. (2006). Structural organization,
neurochemical characteristics, and connections of the reticular
nucleus of the thalamus. Neuroscience and Behavioral Physiology, 36,
987–995.
Nakahara, K., Fukui, K., & Murakami, N. (2004). Involvement of thalamic paraventricular nucleus in the anticipatory reaction under
food restriction in the rat. Journal of Veterinary Medical Science, 66,
1297–1300.
Nakashima, M., Uemura, M., Yasui, K., Ozaki, H. S., Tabata, S., & Taen,
A. (2000). An anterograde and retrograde tract-tracing study on the
projections from the thalamic gustatory area in the rat: Distribution
of neurons projecting to the insular cortex and amygdaloid complex. Neuroscience Research, 36, 297–309.
Namura, S., Takada, M., Kikuchi, H., & Mizuno, N. (1997). Collateral
projections of single neurons in the posterior thalamic region to
both the temporal cortex and the amygdala: A fluorescent retrograde double-labeling study in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 384, 59–70.
Nishiyama, K., Kwak, S., Murayama, S., & Kanazawa, I. (1995). Substance P is a possible neurotransmitter in the rat spinothalamic
tract. Neuroscience Research, 21, 261–266.
Nixon, J. P., & Smale, L. (2005). Orexin fibers form appositions with
Fos expressing neuropeptide-Y cells in the grass rat intergeniculate
leaflet. Brain Research, 1053, 33–37.
Norgren, R., & Leonard, C. M. (1973). Ascending central gustatory
pathways. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 150, 217–237.
Norman, G., & Eacott, M. J. (2004). Impaired object recognition with
increasing levels of feature ambiguity in rats with perirhinal cortex
lesions. Behavioural Brain Research, 148, 79–91.
Novak, C. M., Harris, J. A., Smale, L., & Nunez, A. A. (2000). Suprachiasmatic nucleus projections to the paraventricular thalamic nucleus
in nocturnal rats (Rattus norvegicus) and diurnal nile grass rats
(Arviacanthis niloticus). Brain Research, 874, 147–157.
Odagiri, S., Meguro, R., Asano, Y., Tani, T., & Ichinohe, N. (2011). Single
axon branching analysis in rat thalamocortical projection from the
anteroventral thalamus to the granular retrosplenial cortex. Frontiers in Neuroanatomy, 5, 63.
Ohara, P. T., & Havton, L. A. (1996). Dendritic arbors of neurons from
different regions of the rat thalamic reticular nucleus share a similar
orientation. Brain Research, 731, 236–240.
Ohara, P. T., Lieberman, A. R., Hunt, S. P., & Wu, J. Y. (1983). Neural elements containing glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) in the dorsal
lateral geniculate nucleus of the rat: Immunohistochemical studies
by light and electron microscopy. Neuroscience, 8, 189–211.
Ohtake, T., & Yamada, H. (1989). Efferent connections of the nucleus
reuniens and the rhomboid nucleus in the rat: an anterograde
PHA-L tracing study. Neuroscience Research, 6, 556–568.
Olucha-Bordonau, F. E., Teruel, V., Barcia-González, J., Ruiz-Torner, A.,
Valverde Navarro, A. A., & Martínez-Soriano, F. (2003). Cytoarchitecture and efferent projections of the nucleus incertus of the rat.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 464, 62–97.
Orsini, C. A., & Maren, S. (2009). Glutamate receptors in the medial
geniculate nucleus are necessary for expression and extinction of
conditioned fear in rats. Neurobiology, Learning and Memory, 92,
581–589.
Otake, K. (2005). Cholecystokinin and substance P immunoreactive
projections to the paraventricular thalamic nucleus in the rat. Neuroscience Research, 51, 383–394.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

References

Otake, K., & Nakamura, Y. (1995). Sites of origin of corticotropin-releasing factor-like immunoreactive projection fibers to the paraventricular thalamic nucleus in the rat. Neuroscience Letters, 201, 84–86.
Otake, K., & Nakamura, Y. (1998). Single midline thalamic neurons
projecting to both the ventral striatum and the prefrontal cortex in
the rat. Neuroscience, 86, 635–649.
Otake, K., Ruggiero, D. A., & Nakamura, Y. (1995). Adrenergic innervation of forebrain neurons that project to the paraventricular thalamic nucleus in the rat. Brain Research, 697, 17–26.
Owens, M. A. (2005). Afferent Projections to Rhomboid Nucleus of Thalamus. Florida Atlantic University. Master’s thesis.
Papadopoulos, G. C., & Parnavelas, J. G. (1990). Distribution and
synaptic organization of serotoninergic and noradrenergic axons
in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the rat. Journal of Comparative
­Neurology, 294, 345–355.
Papez, J. W. (1937). A proposed mechanism of emotion. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 7, 103–112.
Paré, D., Steriade, M., Deschênes, M., & Oakson, G. (1987). Physiological characteristics of anterior thalamic nuclei, a group devoid of
inputs from reticular thalamic nucleus. Journal of Neurophysiology,
57, 1669–1685.
Parsons, M. P., Li, S., & Kirouac, G. J. (2006). The paraventricular
nucleus of the thalamus as an interface between the orexin and
CART peptides and the shell of the nucleus accumbens. Synapse,
59, 480–490.
Parsons, M. P., Li, S., & Kirouac, G. J. (2007). Functional and anatomical connection between the paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus
and dopamine fibers of the nucleus accumbens. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 500, 1050–1063.
Parsons, R. G., Riedner, B. A., Gafford, G. M., & Helmstetter, F. J. (2006).
The formation of auditory fear memory requires the synthesis of protein and mRNA in the auditory thalamus. Neuroscience, 141, 1163–1170.
Paul, K., & Cox, C. L. (2010). Excitatory actions of substance P in the rat
lateral posterior nucleus. European Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 1–13.
Paxinos, G., Kus, L., Ashwell, K. W. S., & Watson, C. (1999). Chemoarchitectonic Atlas of the Rat Forebrain. San Diego: Academic Press.
Paxinos, G., & Watson, C. (2014). (7th ed.). The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic
Coordinates. San Diego: Academic Press.
Pekala, D., Błasiak, T., Raastad, M., & Lewandowski, M. H. (2011). The
influence of orexins on the firing rate and pattern of rat intergeniculate leaflet neurons–electrophysiological and immunohistological
studies. European Journal of Neuroscience, 34, 1406–1418.
Peng, Z. C., & Bentivoglio, M. (2004). The thalamic paraventricular
nucleus relays information from the suprachiasmatic nucleus to the
amygdala: a combined anterograde and retrograde tracing study in
the rat at the light and electron microscopic levels. Journal of Neurocytology, 33, 101–116.
Peschanski, M., & Besson, J. M. (1984). A spino-reticulo-thalamic pathway in the rat: An anatomical study with reference to pain transmission. Neuroscience, 12, 165–178.
Petersen, C. C. H. (2007). The functional organization of the barrel cortex. Neuron, 56, 339–355.
Petreanu, L., Mao, T., Sternson, S. M., & Svoboda, K. (2009). The subcellular organization of neocortical excitatory connections. Nature,
457, 1142–1145.
Petrof, I., & Brown, V. J. (2010). Attention to visual, but not tactile, properties of a stimulus results in activation of FOS protein in the visual thalamic reticular nucleus of rats. Behavioural Brain Research, 211, 248–252.
Petrof, I., & Sherman, S. M. (2009). Synaptic properties of the mammillary and cortical afferents to the anterodorsal thalamic nucleus in
the mouse. Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 7815–7819.
Peyron, C., Tighe, D. K., van den Pol, A. N., de Lecea, L., Heller, H. C.,
Sutcliffe, J. G., et al. (1998). Neurons containing hypocretin (orexin)
project to multiple neuronal systems. Journal of Neuroscience, 18,
9996–10015.

385

Pierret, T., Lavallée, P., & Deschênes, M. (2000). Parallel streams for the
relay of vibrissal information through thalamic barreloids. Journal
of Neuroscience, 20, 7455–7462.
Piggins, H. D., Samuels, R. E., Coogan, A. N., & Cutler, D. J. (2001). Distribution of substance P and neurokinin-1 receptor immunoreactivity
in the suprachiasmatic nuclei and intergeniculate leaflet of hamster,
mouse, and rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 438, 50–65.
Pinault, D. (2004). The thalamic reticular nucleus: structure, function
and concept. Brain Research Review, 46, 1–31.
Pinault, D., & Deschênes, M. (1998a). Projection and innervation patterns of individual thalamic reticular axons in the thalamus of the
adult rat: A three-dimensional, graphic, and morphometric analysis. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 391, 180–203.
Pinault, D., & Deschênes, M. (1998b). Anatomical evidence for a mechanism of lateral inhibition in the rat thalamus. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 10, 3462–3469.
Pinault, D., Smith, Y., & Deschênes, M. (1997). Dendrodendritic and
axoaxonic synapses in the thalamic reticular nucleus of the adult
rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 3215–3233.
Pinto, A., Jankowski, M., & Sesack, S. R. (2003). Projections from the
paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus to the rat prefrontal cortex
and nucleus accumbens shell: ultrastructural characteristics and
spatial relationships with dopamine afferents. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 459, 142–155.
Plailly, J., Howard, J. D., Gitelman, D. R., & Gottfried, J. A. (2008).
Attention to odor modulates thalamocortical connectivity in the
human brain. Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 5257–5267.
Porter, M. C., Burk, J. A., & Mair, R. G. (2000). A comparison of the
effects of hippocampal or prefrontal cortical lesions on three versions of delayed non-matching-to-sample based on positional or
spatial cues. Behavioural Brain Research, 109, 69–81.
Porter, M. C., & Mair, R. G. (1997). The effects of frontal cortical lesions
on remembering depend on the procedural demands of tasks
performed in the radial arm maze. Behavioural Brain Research, 87,
115–125.
Power, B. D., & Mitrofanis, J. (2001). Zona incerta: Substrate for contralateral interconnectivity in the thalamus of rats. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 436, 52–63.
Power, B. D., Kolmac, C. I., & Mitrofanis, J. (1999). Evidence for a large
projection from the zona incerta to the dorsal thalamus. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 404, 554–565.
Prasad, J. A., Macgregor, E. M., & Chudasama, Y. (2013). Lesions of the
thalamic reuniens cause impulsive but not compulsive responses.
Brain Structure and Function, 218, 85–96.
Price, J. L. (1990). Olfactory system. In G. Paxinos (Ed.), The Human
Nervous System (pp. 979–1001). San Diego: Academic Press.
Price, J. L. (1995). Thalamus. In G. Paxinos (Ed.), The Rat Nervous System (2nd ed.) (pp. 629–648). San Diego: Academic Press.
Price, J. L., & Slotnick, B. M. (1983). Dual olfactory representation in the
rat thalamus: An anatomical and electrophysiological study. Journal
of Comparative Neurology, 215, 63–77.
Ragozzino, M. E., Detrick, S., & Kesner, R. P. (1999). Involvement of the
prelimbic-infralimbic areas of the rodent prefrontal cortex in behavioral flexibility for place and response learning. Journal of Neuroscience, 19, 4585–4594.
Ray, J. P., & Price, J. L. (1992). The organization of the thalamocortical
connections of the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus in the rat, related
to the ventral forebrain–prefrontal cortex topography. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 323, 167–197.
Reep, R. L., Chandler, H. C., King, V., & Corwin, J. V. (1994). Rat posterior parietal cortex: topography of corticocortical and thalamic connections. Experimental Brain Research, 100, 67–84.
Reep, R. L., Cheatwood, J. L., & Corwin, J. V. (2003). The associative
striatum: organization of cortical projections to the dorsocentral
striatum in rats. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 467, 271–292.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

386

16. THALAMUS

Reep, R. L., & Corwin, J. V. (1999). Topographic organization of the
striatal and thalamic connections of rat medial agranular cortex.
Brain Research, 841, 43–52.
Reep, R. L., & Corwin, J. V. (2009). Posterior parietal cortex as part of a
neural network for directed attention in rats. Neurobiology, Learning
and Memory, 91, 104–113.
Reep, R. L., Corwin, J. V., Cheatwood, J. L., Van Vleet, T. M., Heilman,
K. M., & Watson, R. T. (2004). A rodent model for investigating the
neurobiology of contralateral neglect. Cognitive and Behavoral Neurology, 17, 191–194.
Reep, R. L., Corwin, J. V., Hashimoto, A., & Watson, R. T. (1987). Efferent connections of the rostral portion of medial agranular cortex in
rats. Brain Research Bulletin, 19, 203–221.
Reep, R. L., Corwin, J. V., & King, V. (1996). Neuronal connections of
orbital cortex in rats: Topography of cortical and thalamic afferents.
Experimental Brain Research, 111, 215–232.
Reep, R. L., & Winans, S. S. (1982). Efferent connections of dorsal and
ventral agranular insular cortex in the hamster, Mesocricetus auratus. Neuroscience, 7, 2609–2635.
Reese, B. E. (1988). “Hidden lamination” in the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus: The functional organization of this thalamic region in the
rat. Brain Research, 472, 119–137.
Ribak, C. E., & Peters, A. (1975). An autoradiographic study of the projections from the lateral geniculate body of the rat. Brain Research,
92, 341–368.
Rich, E. L., & Shapiro, M. (2009). Rat prefrontal cortical neurons selectively code strategy switches. Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 7208–7219.
Risold, P. Y., Canteras, N. S., & Swanson, L. W. (1994). Organization
of projections from the anterior hypothalamic nucleus: a Phaseolus
vulgaris-leucoagglutinin study in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 348, 1–40.
Risold, P. Y., Thompson, R. H., & Swanson, L. W. (1997). The structural
organization of connections between hypothalamus and cerebral
cortex. Brain Research Review, 24, 197–254.
Roberts, V. J., & Dong, W. K. (1994). The effect of thalamic nucleus
submedius lesions on nociceptive responding in rats. Pain, 57,
341–349.
Rodríguez, J. J., Noristani, H. N., Hoover, W. B., Linley, S. B., & Vertes, R.
P. (2011). Serotonergic projections and serotonin receptor expression in
the reticular nucleus of the thalamus in the rat. Synapse, 65, 919–928.
Roger, M., & Arnault, P. (1989). Anatomical study of the connections of
the primary auditory area in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 287, 339–356.
Romanski, L. M., & LeDoux, J. E. (1993). Organization of rodent auditory cortex: Anterograde transport of PHA-L from MGv to temporal neocortex. Cerebral Cortex, 3, 499–514.
Rotaru, D. C., Barrionuevo, G., & Sesack, S. R. (2005). Mediodorsal
thalamic afferents to layer III of the rat prefrontal cortex: synaptic
relationships to subclasses of interneurons. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 490, 220–238.
Rouiller, E. M., & Welker, E. (1991). Morphology of corticothalamic
terminals arising from the auditory cortex of the rat: A Phaseolus
vulgaris-leucoagglutinin (PHA-L) tracing study. Hearing Research,
56, 179–190.
Ruggiero, D. A., Anwar, S., Kim, J., & Glickstein, S. B. (1998). Visceral
afferent pathways to the thalamus and olfactory tubercle: Behavioral implications. Brain Research, 799, 159–171.
Saez, J. A., Palomares, J. M., Vives, F., Dominguez, I., Villegas, I.,
Montes, R., et al. (1998). Electrophysiological and neurochemical
study of the rat geniculo-cortical pathway: Evidence for glutamatergic neurotransmission. European Journal of Neuroscience, 10,
2790–2801.
Sakai, S. T., & Grofova, I. (2002). Distribution of the basal ganglia and
cerebellar projections to the rodent motor thalamus. In A. Graybiel,
S. Kitai, & M. Delong (Eds.), The Basal Ganglia VI (pp. 455–462).
New York: Plenum Press.

Sakai, S. T., & Bruce, K. (2004). Pallidothalamic pathway to the medial
agranular cortex in the rat: a double labeling light and electron
microscopic study. Thalamus and Related Systems, 2, 273–286.
Sakai, S. T., Grofova, I., & Bruce, K. (1998). Nigrothalamic projections
and nigrothalamocortical pathway to the medial agranular cortex
in the rat: Single- and double-labeling light and electron microscopic studies. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 391, 506–525.
Samuelsen, C. L., Gardner, M. P., & Fontanini, A. (2013). Thalamic contribution to cortical processing of taste and expectation. Journal of
Neuroscience, 33, 1815–1827.
Sanderson, K. J., Dreher, B., & Gayer, N. (1991). Prosencephalic connections of striate and extrastriate areas of rat visual cortex. Experimental Brain Research, 85, 324–334.
Savage, L. M., Hall, J. M., & Vetreno, R. P. (2011). Anterior thalamic
lesions alter both hippocampal-dependent behavior and hippocampal acetylcholine release in the rat. Learning and Memory, 18,
751–758.
Sawyer, S. F., Tepper, J. M., & Groves, P. M. (1994a). Cerebellar-responsive neurons in the thalamic ventroanterior–ventrolateral complex
of rats: Light and electron microscopy. Neuroscience, 63, 725–745.
Sawyer, S. F., Young, S. J., Groves, P. M., & Tepper, J. M. (1994b). Cerebellar-responsive neurons in the thalamic ventroanterior-ventrolateral
complex of rats: In vivo electrophysiology. Neuroscience, 63, 711–724.
Schmidt, M., Schiff, D., & Bentivoglio, M. (1995). Independent efferent
populations in the nucleus of the optic tract: An anatomical and
physiological study in rat and cat. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
360, 271–285.
Seki, M., & Zyo, K. (1984). Anterior thalamic afferents from the mamillary body and the limbic cortex in the rat. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 229, 242–256.
Senatorov, V. V., & Hu, B. (2002). Extracortical descending projections
to the rat inferior colliculus. Neuroscience, 115, 243–250.
Sesack, S. R., Deutch, A. Y., Roth, R. H., & Bunney, B. S. (1989). Topographic
organization of the efferent projections of the medial prefrontal cortex
in the rat: An anterograde tract- tracing study with Phaseolus vulgaris
leucoagglutinin. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 290, 213–242.
Shammah-Lagnado, S. J., Alheid, G. F., & Heimer, L. (1996). Efferent
connections of the caudal part of the globus pallidus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 376, 489–507.
Shepherd, G. M., & Svoboda, K. (2005). Laminar and columnar
organization of ascending excitatory projections to layer 2/3
pyramidal neurons in rat barrel cortex. Journal of Neuroscience,
25, 5670–5679.
Sherman, S. M., & Guillery, R. W. (1998). On the actions that one nerve cell
can have on another: Distinguishing “drivers” from “modulators.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 95, 7121–7126.
Sherman, S. M., & Guillery, R. W. (2001). Exploring the Thalamus. San
Diego: Academic Press.
Sherman, S. M., & Guillery, R. W. (2006). Exploring the Thalamus and its
Role in Cortical Function. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shi, C. J., & Cassell, M. D. (1997). Cortical, thalamic, and amygdaloid
projections of rat temporal cortex. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
382, 153–175.
Shi, C. J., & Cassell, M. D. (1998a). Cortical, thalamic, and amygdaloid
connections of the anterior and posterior insular cortices. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 399, 440–468.
Shi, C. J., & Cassell, M. D. (1998b). Cascade projections from somatosensory cortex to the rat basolateral amygdala via the parietal insular cortex. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 399, 469–491.
Shibata, H. (1992). Topographic organization of subcortical projections
to the anterio thalamic nuclei in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 323, 117–127.
Shibata, H. (1993a). Efferent projections from the anterior thalamic
nuclei to the cingulate cortex in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 330, 533–542.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

References

Shibata, H. (1993b). Direct projections from the anterior thalamic nuclei
to the retrohippocampal region in the rat. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 337, 431–445.
Shibata, H. (1996). Direct projections from the entorhinal area to the
anteroventral and laterodorsal thalamic nuclei in the rat. Neuroscience Research, 26, 83–87.
Shibata, H. (1998). Organization of projections of rat retrosplenial cortex to the anterior thalamic nuclei. European Journal of Neuroscience,
10, 3210–3219.
Shibata, H. (2000). Organization of the retrosplenial cortical projections
to the laterodorsal thalamic nucleus in the rat. Neuroscience Research,
38, 303–311.
Shibata, H., & Honda, Y. (2012). Thalamocortical projections of the
anterodorsal thalamic nucleus in the rabbit. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 520, 2647–2656.
Shibata, H., & Naito, J. (2005). Organization of anterior cingulate and
frontal cortical projections to the anterior and laterodorsal thalamic
nuclei in the rat. Brain Research, 1059, 93–103.
Shin, J. W., Geerling, J. C., & Loewy, A. D. (2008). Inputs to the ventrolateral bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 511, 628–657.
Shinkai, M., Yokofujita, J., Oda, S., Murakami, K., Igarashi, H., &
Kuroda, M. (2005). Dual axonal terminations from the retrosplenial
and visual association cortices in the laterodorsal thalamic nucleus
of the rat. Anatomy and Embryology, 210, 317–326.
Shires, K. L., Hawthorne, J. P., Hope, A. M., Dudchenko, P. A., Wood, E.
R., & Martin, S. J. (2013). Functional connectivity between the thalamus and postsubiculum: Analysis of evoked responses elicited by
stimulation of the laterodorsal thalamic nucleus in anesthetized
rats. Hippocampus, 23, 559–569.
Shiroyama, T., Kayahara, T., Yasui, Y., Nomura, J., & Nakano, K. (1999).
Projections of the vestibular nuclei to the thalamus in the rat: A
Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin study. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 407, 318–332.
Slotnick, B. M., & Kaneko, N. (1981). Role of mediodorsal thalamic
nucleus in olfactory discrimination learning in rats. Science, 214,
91–92.
Smith, P. H., Uhlrich, D. J., Manning, K. A., & Banks, M. I. (2012). Thalamocortical projections to rat auditory cortex from the ventral and
dorsal divisions of the medial geniculate nucleus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 520, 34–51.
Spreafico, R., Battaglia, G., & Frassoni, C. (1991). The reticular thalamic
nucleus (RTN) of the rat: Cytoarchitectural, Golgi, immunocytochemical, and horseradish peroxidase study. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 304, 478–490.
Staubli, U., Schottler, F., & Nejat-Bina, D. (1987). Role of dorsomedial
thalamic nucleus and piriform cortex in processing olfactory information. Behavioural Brain Research, 25, 117–129.
Stefani, M. R., Groth, K., & Moghaddam, B. (2003). Glutamate receptors in the rat medial prefrontal cortex regulate set-shifting ability.
Behavioral Neuroscience, 117, 728–737.
Stehberg, J., Acuna-Goycolea, C., Ceric, F., & Torrealba, F. (2001). The
visceral sector of the thalamic reticular nucleus in the rat. Neuroscience, 106, 745–755.
Steriade, M., Domich, L., Oakson, G., & Deschênes, M. (1987). The
deafferented reticular thalamic nucleus generates spindle rhythmicity. Journal of Neurophysiology, 57, 260–273.
Stevenson, R. J., & Boakes, R. A. (2003). A mnemonic theory of odor
perception. Psychological Review, 110, 340–364.
Su, H. S., & Bentivoglio, M. (1990). Thalamic midline cell populations projecting to the nucleus accumbens, amygdala, and
hippocampus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 297,
582–593.
Sukekawa, K. (1988). Reciprocal connections between medial prefrontal cortex and lateral posterior nucleus in rats. Brain, Behavior and
Evolution, 32, 246–251.

387

Sun, X., Chen, Q. C., & Jen, P. H. -S. (1996). Corticofugal control of central auditory sensitivity in the big brown bat, Eptesicus fuscus. Neuroscience Letters, 212, 131–134.
Swadlow, H. A., & Gusev, A. G. (2001). The impact of “bursting” thalamic
impulses at a neocortical synapse. Nature Neuroscience, 4, 402–408.
Swanson, L. W. (1981). A direct projection from Ammon’s horn to prefrontal cortex in the rat. Brain Res, 217, 150–154.
Swanson, L. W. (2004). Brain maps: structure of the rat brain. New York:
Elsevier.
Swanson, L. W., & Cowan, W. M. (1977). An autoradiographic study
of the organization of the efferent connections of the hippocampal
formation in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 172, 49–84.
Sziklas, V., & Petrides, M. (1993). Memory impairments following
lesions to the mammillary region of the rat. European Journal of Neuroscience, 5, 525–540.
Sziklas, V., & Petrides, M. (1999). The effects of lesions to the anterior
thalamic nuclei on object-place associations in rats. European Journal
of Neuroscience, 11, 559–566.
Sziklas, V., & Petrides, M. (2007). Contribution of the anterior thalamic
nuclei to conditional learning in rats. Hippocampus, 17, 456–461.
Taber, K. H., Wen, C., Khan, A., & Hurley, R. A. (2004). The limbic thalamus. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 16, 127–132.
Takada, M., Campbell, K. J., Moriizumi, T., & Hattori, T. (1990). On
the origin of the dopaminergic innervation of the paraventricular
thalamic nucleus. Neuroscience Letters, 115, 33–36.
Takahashi, T. (1985). The organization of the lateral thalamus of the
hooded rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 231, 281–309.
Talk, A., Kang, E., & Gabriel, M. (2004). Independent generation of
theta rhythm in the hippocampus and posterior cingulate cortex.
Brain Research, 1015, 15–24.
Tang, J. S., Qu, C. L., & Huo, F. Q. (2009). The thalamic nucleus submedius and ventrolateral orbital cortex are involved in nociceptive
modulation: a novel pain modulation pathway. Progress in Neurobiology, 89, 383–389.
Taube, J. S. (1995). Head direction cells recorded in the anterior thalamic nuclei of freely moving rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 15, 70–86.
Taube, J. S. (1998). Head direction cells and the neurophysiological
basis for a sense of direction. Progress in Neurobiology, 55, 225–256.
Taube, J. S. (2007). The head direction signal: origins and sensorymotor integration. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 30, 181–207.
Teixeira, C. M., Pomedli, S. R., Maei, H. R., Kee, N., & Frankland, P.
W. (2006). Involvement of the anterior cingulate cortex in the
expression of remote spatial memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 26,
7555–7564.
Tham, W. W. P., Stevenson, R. J., & Miller, L. A. (2009). The functional
role of the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus in olfaction. Brain Research
Review, 62, 109–126.
Tham, W. W. P., Stevenson, R. J., & Miller, L. A. (2011a). The role of
the mediodorsal thalamic nucleus in human olfaction. Neurocase,
17, 148–159.
Tham, W. W. P., Stevenson, R. J., & Miller, L. A. (2011b). The impact
of mediodorsal thalamic lesions on olfactory attention and flavor
perception. Brain and Cognition, 77, 71–79.
Thompson, S. M., & Robertson, R. T. (1987a). Organization of subcortical pathways for sensory projections to the limbic cortex. I. Subcortical projections to the medial limbic cortex in the rat. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 265, 175–188.
Thompson, S. M., & Robertson, R. T. (1987b). Organization of subcortical pathways for sensory projections to the limbic cortex. II. Afferent projections to the thalamus lateral dorsal nucleus in the rat.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 265, 189–202.
Tracey, D. (2004). Somatosensory system. In G. Paxinos (Ed.), The Rat
Nervous System (3rd ed.) (pp. 797–815). San Diego: Academic Press.
Tripathi, A., Prensa, L., & Mengual, E. (2012). Axonal branching patterns of ventral pallidal neurons in the rat. Brain Structure and Function, 218, 1133–1157.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

388

16. THALAMUS

Tsanov, M., Chah, E., Wright, N., Vann, S. D., Reilly, R., Erichsen,
J. T., et al. (2011a). Oscillatory entrainment of thalamic neurons
by theta rhythm in freely moving rats. Journal of Neurophysiology,
105, 4–17.
Tsanov, M., Chah, E., Vann, S. D., Reilly, R. B., Erichsen, J. T., Aggleton,
J. P., et al. (2011b). Theta-modulated head direction cells in the rat
anterior thalamus. Journal of Neuroscience, 31, 9489–9502.
Turner, B. H., & Herkenham, M. (1991). Thalamoamygdaloid projections in the rat: A test of the amygdala’s role in sensory processing.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 313, 295–325.
Urbain, N., & Deschênes, M. (2007). A new thalamic pathway of vibrissal information modulated by the motor cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 12407–12412.
Uylings, H. M. B., & Van Eden, C. G. (1990). Qualitative and quantitative comparison of the prefrontal cortex in the rat and in primates,
including humans. Progress in Brain Research, 85, 31–62.
Vaccaro, T., & Mitrofanis, J. (1997). Does the reticular thalamic
nucleus project to the midbrain? Journal of Neurocytology, 26,
223–239.
Van der Loos, H. (1976). Barreloids in mouse somatosensory thalamus.
Neuroscience Letters, 2, 1–6.
Van der Werf, Y. D., Scheltens, P., Lindeboom, J., Witter, M. P., Uylings,
H. B., & Jolles, J. (2003). Deficits of memory, executive functioning
and attention following infarction in the thalamus; a study of 22
cases with localised lesions. Neuropsychologia, 41, 1330–1344.
Van der Werf, Y. D., Witter, M. P., & Groenewegen, H. J. (2002). The
intralaminar and midline nuclei of the thalamus. Anatomical and
functional evidence for participation in processes of arousal and
awareness. Brain Research Review, 39, 107–140.
Van der Werf, Y. D., Witter, M. P., Uylings, H. B., & Jolles, J. (2000).
Neuropsychology of infarctions in the thalamus: a review. Neuropsychologia, 38, 613–627.
Van Groen, T., Kadish, I., & Wyss, J. M. (1999). Efferent connections of
the anteromedial nucleus of the thalamus of the rat. Brain Research
Review, 30, 1–26.
Van Groen, T., Kadish, I., & Wyss, J. W. (2002). Role of the anterodorsal
and anteroventral nuclei of the thalamus in spatial memory in the
rat. Behavioural Brain Research, 132, 19–28.
Van Groen, T., & Wyss, J. M. (1990a). The postsubicular cortex in the
rat: Characterization of the fourth region of the subicular cortex and
its connections. Brain Research, 529, 165–177.
Van Groen, T., & Wyss, J. M. (1990b). The connections of presubiculum
and parasubiculum in the rat. Brain Research, 518, 227–243.
Van Groen, T., & Wyss, J. M. (1990c). Connections of the retrosplenial
granular a cortex in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 300,
593–606.
Van Groen, T., & Wyss, J. M. (1992a). Connections of the retrosplenial
dysgranular cortex in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 315,
200–216.
Van Groen, T., & Wyss, J. M. (1992b). Projections from the laterodorsal
nucleus of the thalamus to the limbic and visual cortices in the rat.
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 324, 427–448.
Van Groen, T., & Wyss, J. M. (1995). Projections from the anterodorsal
and anteroventral nucleus of the thalamus to the limbic cortex in
the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 358, 584–604.
Van Groen, T., & Wyss, J. M. (2003). Connections of the retrosplenial
granular b cortex in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 463,
249–263.
Van Horn, S. C., Erişir, A., & Sherman, S. M. (2000). Relative distribution of synapses in the A-laminae of the lateral geniculate nucleus
of the cat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 416, 509–520.
Vann, S. D. (2009). Gudden’s ventral tegmental nucleus is vital for
memory: re-evaluating diencephalic inputs for amnesia. Brain, 132,
2372–2384.
Vann, S. D. (2010). Re-evaluating the role of the mammillary bodies in
memory. Neuropsychologia, 48, 2316–2327.

Vann, S. D., & Aggleton, J. P. (2003). Evidence of a spatial encoding
deficit in rats with lesions of the mammillary bodies or mammillothalamic tract. Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 3506–3514.
Vann, S. D., & Aggleton, J. P. (2004). The mammillary bodies: two memory systems in one? Nature Revews Neuroscience, 5, 35–44.
Vann, S. D., Erichsen, J. T., O’Mara, S. M., & Aggleton, J. P. (2011). Selective disconnection of the hippocampal formation projections to the
mammillary bodies produces only mild deficits on spatial memory
tasks: implications for fornix function. Hippocampus, 21, 945–957.
Varela, C., Kumar, S., Yang, J. Y., & Wilson, M. A. (2014). Anatomical
substrates for direct interactions between hippocampus, medial
prefrontal cortex, and the thalamic nucleus reuniens. Brain Structure and Function, 219, 911–929.
Vaudano, E., & Legg, C. R. (1992). Cerebellar connections of the
ventral lateral geniculate nucleus in the rat. Anatomy and Embryology
(Berlin), 186, 583–588.
Vaudano, E., Legg, C. R., & Glickstein, M. (1991). Afferent and efferent
connections of temporal association cortex in the rat: A horseradish
peroxidase study. European Journal of Neuroscience, 3, 317–330.
Veinante, P., & Deschênes, M. (1999). Single- and multi-whisker channels in the ascending projections from the principal trigeminal
nucleus in the rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 19, 5085–5095.
Veinante, P., Jacquin, M. F., & Deschênes, M. (2000a). Thalamic projections from the whisker-sensitive regions of the spinal trigeminal
complex in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 420, 233–243.
Veinante, P., Lavallée, P., & Deschênes, M. (2000b). Corticothalamic
projections from layer 5 of the vibrissal barrel cortex in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 424, 197–204.
Verbny, Y. I., Erdelyi, F., Szabo, G., & Banks, M. I. (2006). Properties of
a population of GABAergic cells in murine auditory cortex weakly
excited by thalamic stimulation. Journal of Neurophysiology, 96,
3194–3208.
Verhagen, J. V., Giza, B. K., & Scott, T. R. (2003). Responses to taste
stimulation in the ventroposteromedial nucleus of the thalamus in
rats. Journal of Neurophysiology, 89, 265–275.
Vertes, R. P. (1991). A PHA L analysis of ascending projections of the
dorsal raphe nucleus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
313, 643–668.
Vertes, R. P. (1992). PHA-L analysis of projections from the supramammillary nucleus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 326,
595–622.
Vertes, R. P. (2002). Analysis of projections from the medial prefrontal
cortex to the thalamus in the rat, with emphasis on nucleus reuniens. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 442, 163–187.
Vertes, R. P. (2004). Differential projections of the infralimbic and prelimbic cortex in the rat. Synapse, 51, 32–58.
Vertes, R. P. (2005). Hippocampal theta rhythm: A tag for short term
memory. Hippocampus, 15, 923–935.
Vertes, R. P. (2006). Interactions among the medial prefrontal cortex,
hippocampus and midline thalamus in emotional and cognitive
processing in the rat. Neuroscience, 142, 1–20.
Vertes, R. P., Albo, Z., & Viana Di Prisco, G. (2001). Theta-rhythmically
firing neurons in the anterior thalamus: implications for mnemonic
functions of Papez’s circuit. Neuroscience, 104, 619–625.
Vertes, R. P., Crane, A. M., Colom, L. V., & Bland, B. H. (1995). Ascending projections of the posterior nucleus of the hypothalamus: PHA-L
analysis in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 359, 90–116.
Vertes, R. P., Fortin, W. J., & Crane, A. M. (1999). Projections of the
median raphe nucleus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
407, 555–582.
Vertes, R. P., & Hoover, W. B. (2008). Projections of the paraventricular
and paratenial nuclei of the dorsal midline thalamus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 508, 212–237.
Vertes, R. P., Hoover, W. B., do Valle, A. C., Sherman, A., & Rodriguez, J.
J. (2006). Efferent projections of reuniens and rhomboid nuclei of the
thalamus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 499, 768–796.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

References

Vertes, R. P., Hoover, W. B., & Rodriguez, J. J. (2012). Projections of the
central medial nucleus of the thalamus in the rat: node in cortical,
striatal and limbic forebrain circuitry. Neuroscience, 219, 120–136.
Vertes, R. P., Hoover, W. B., Szigeti, K., & Leranth, C. (2007). Nucleus
reuniens of the midline thalamus: link between the medial prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus. Brain Research Bulletin, 71, 601–609.
Vertes, R. P., Hoover, W. B., & Viana Di Prisco, G. (2004). Theta rhythm
of the hippocampus: subcortical control and functional significance. Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews, 3, 173–200.
Vertes, R. P., & Kocsis, B. (1997). Brainstem-diencephalo-septohippocampal systems controlling the theta rhythm of the hippocampus.
Neuroscience, 81, 893–926.
Vertes, R. P., Linley, S. B., & Hoover, W. B. (2010). Pattern of distribution
of serotonergic fibers to the thalamus of the rat. Brain Structure and
Function, 215, 1–28.
Vertes, R. P., & Martin, G. F. (1988). Autoradiographic analysis of
ascending projections from the pontine and mesencephalic reticular formation and the median raphe nucleus in the rat. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 275, 511–541.
Vertes, R. P., Martin, G. F., & Waltzer, R. (1986). An autoradiographic
analysis of ascending projections from the medullary reticular formation in the rat. Neuroscience, 19, 873–898.
Viana Di Prisco, G., & Vertes, R. P. (2006). Excitatory actions of the ventral midline thalamus (rhomboid/reuniens) on the medial prefrontal cortex in the rat. Synapse, 60, 45–55.
Villanueva, L., Desbois, C., Le Bars, D., & Bernard, J. F. (1998). Organization of diencephalic projections from the medullary subnucleus
reticularis dorsalis and the adjacent cuneate nucleus: A retrograde
and anterograde tracer study in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 390, 133–160.
Von Cramon, D. Y., Hebel, N., & Schuri, U. (1985). A contribution to the
anatomical basis of thalamic amnesia. Brain, 108, 993–1008.
Waite, P. M. E. (2004). Trigeminal sensory system. In G. Paxinos (Ed.), The
Rat Nervous System (3rd ed.) (pp. 817–851). San Diego: Academic Press.
Wang, C. C., & Shyu, B. C. (2004). Differential projections from the
mediodorsal and centrolateral thalamic nuclei to the frontal cortex
in rats. Brain Research, 995, 226–235.
Warburton, E. C., Baird, A., Morgan, A., Muir, J. L., & Aggleton, J. P.
(2001). The conjoint importance of the hippocampus and anterior
thalamic nuclei for allocentric spatial learning: Evidence from a disconnection study in the rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 21, 7323–7330.
Waterhouse, B. D., Border, B., Wahl, L., & Mihailoff, G. A. (1993). Topographic organization of rat locus coeruleus and dorsal raphe nuclei:
distribution of cells projecting to visual system structures. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 336, 345–361.
Weese, G. D., Phillips, J. M., & Brown, V. J. (1999). Attentional orienting
is impaired by unilateral lesions of the thalamic reticular nucleus in
the rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 19, 10135–10139.
Weinberger, N. M. (2011). The medial geniculate, not the amygdala, as
the root of auditory fear conditioning. Hearing Research, 274, 61–74.
Welker, E., Hoogland, P. V., & Van der Loos, H. (1988). Organization of
feedback and feedforward projections of the barrel cortex: A PHA-L
study in the mouse. Experimental Brain Research, 73, 411–435.
Wiener, S. I., & Taube, J. S. (2005). Head Direction Cells and the Neural
Mechanisms of Spatial Orientation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Williams, M. N., Zahm, D. S., & Jacquin, M. F. (1994). Differential foci
and synaptic organization of the principal and spinal trigeminal
projections to the thalamus in the rat. European Journal of Neuroscience, 6, 429–453.
Willis, W. D., Westlund, K. N., & Carlton, S. M. (2004). Pain System. In
G. Paxinos (Ed.), The Rat Nervous System (3rd ed.) (pp. 853–890).
San Diego: Academic Press.
Wilton, L. A., Baird, A. L., Muir, J. L., Honey, R. C., & Aggleton, J. P.
(2001). Loss of the thalamic nuclei for “head direction” impairs performance on spatial memory tasks in rats. Behavioral Neuroscience,
115, 861–869.

389

Wimmer, V. C., Bruno, R. M., de Kock, C. P., Kuner, T., & Sakmann,
B. (2010). Dimensions of a projection column and architecture of
VPM and POm axons in rat vibrissal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 20,
2265–2276.
Winer, J. A., Chernock, M. L., Larue, D. T., & Cheung, S. W. (2002).
Descending projections to the inferior colliculus from the posterior
thalamus and the auditory cortex in rat, cat, and monkey. Hearing
Research, 168, 181–195.
Winer, J. A., Kelly, J. B., & Larue, D. T. (1999a). Neural architecture of
the rat medial geniculate body. Hearing Research, 130, 19–41.
Winer, J. A., & Larue, D. T. (1988). Anatomy of glutamic acid decarboxylase immunoreactive neurons and axons in the rat medial geniculate body. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 278, 47–68.
Winer, J. A., Sally, S. L., Larue, D. T., & Kelly, J. B. (1999b). Origins of
medial geniculate body projections to physiologically defined
zones of rat primary auditory cortex. Hearing Research, 130, 42–61.
Witter, M. P., Ostendorf, R. H., & Groenewegen, H. J. (1990). Heterogeneity in the dorsal subiculum of the rat: Distinct neuronal zones
project to different cortical and subcortical targets. European Journal
of Neuroscience, 2, 718–725.
Wolff, M., Gibb, S. J., Cassel, J. C., & Dalrymple-Alford, J. C. (2008).
Anterior but not intralaminar thalamic nuclei support allocentric
spatial memory. Neurobiology, Learning and Memory, 90, 71–80.
Woolf, N. J., & Butcher, L. L. (1986). Cholinergic systems in the rat
brain: III. Projections from the pontomesencephalic tegmentum
to the thalamus, tectum, basal ganglia, and basal forebrain. Brain
Research Bulletin, 16, 603–637.
Wouterlood, F. G. (1991). Innervation of entorhinal principal cells by
neurons of the nucleus reuniens thalami. Anterograde PHA-L tracing combined with retrograde fluorescent tracing and intracellular
injection with lucifer yellow in the rat. European Journal of Neuroscience, 3, 641–647.
Wouterlood, F. G., Saldana, E., & Witter, M. P. (1990). Projection from
the nucleus reuniens thalami to the hippocampal region: Light and
electron microscopic tracing study in the rat with the anterograde
tracer Phaseolus vulgaris-leucoagglutinin. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 296, 179–203.
Wright, A. K., Norrie, L., & Arbuthnott, G. W. (2000). Corticofugal axons
from adjacent ‘barrel” columns of rat somatosensory cortex: Cortical
and thalamic terminal patterns. Journal of Anatomy, 196, 379–390.
Wright, N. F., Erichsen, J. T., Vann, S. D., O’Mara, S. M., & Aggleton,
J. P. (2010). Parallel but separate inputs from limbic cortices to the
mammillary bodies and anterior thalamic nuclei in the rat. Journal
of Comparative Neurology, 518, 2334–2354.
Wright, N. F., Vann, S. D., Erichsen, J. T., O’Mara, S., & Aggleton, J.
P. (2013). Segregation of parallel inputs to the anteromedial and
anteroventral thalamic nuclei of the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 521, 2966–2986.
Wu, J. H., Corwin, J. V., & Reep, R. L. (2009). Organization of the corticostriatal projection from rat medial agranular cortex to far dorsolateral striatum. Brain Research, 1280, 69–76.
Yamamoto, T., Kishimoto, Y., Yoshikawa, H., & Oka, H. (1990). Cortical laminar distribution of rat thalamic ventrolateral fibers demonstrated by the PHA-L anterograde labeling method. Neuroscience
Research, 9, 148–154.
Yamamoto, T., Matsuo, R., Kiyomitsu, Y., & Kitamura, R. (1988). Sensory
inputs from the oral region to the cerebral cortex in behaving rats: an
analysis of unit responses in cortical somatosensory and taste areas
during ingestive behavior. Journal of Neurophysiology, 60, 1303–1321.
Yamasaki, D. S., Krauthamer, G. M., & Rhoades, R. W. (1986). Superior
collicular projection to intralaminar thalamus in rat. Brain Research,
378, 223–233.
Yoder, R. M., & Taube, J. S. (2011). Projections to the anterodorsal thalamus and lateral mammillary nuclei arise from different cell populations within the postsubiculum: implications for the control of head
direction cells. Hippocampus, 21, 1062–1073.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

390

16. THALAMUS

Yoshida, A., Dostrovsky, J. O., & Chiang, C. Y. (1992). The afferent and
efferent connections of the nucleus submedius in the rat. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 324, 115–133.
Yoshida, A., Dostrovsky, J. O., Sessle, B. J., & Chiang, C. Y. (1991). Trigeminal projections to the nucleus submedius of the thalamus in
the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 307, 609–625.
Young, W. S., Alheid, G. F., & Heimer, L. (1984). The ventral pallidal
projection to the mediodorsal thalamus: a study with fluorescent
retrograde tracers and immunohistofluorescence. Journal of Neuroscience, 4, 1626–1638.
Yu, C., Derdikman, D., Haidarliu, S., & Ahissar, E. (2006). Parallel thalamic pathways for whisking and touch signals in the rat. PLoS Biology, 4, e124.
Yu, X. J., Meng, X. K., Xu, X. X., & He, J. (2011). Individual auditory
thalamic reticular neurons have large and cross-modal sources of
cortical and thalamic inputs. Neuroscience, 193, 122–131.
Zahm, D. S. (2000). An integrative neuroanatomical perspective on some
subcortical substrates of adaptive responding with emphasis on the
nucleus accumbens. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 24, 85–105.
Zahm, D. S., Williams, E., & Wohltmann, C. (1996). Ventral striatopallidothalamic projection: IV. Relative involvements of neurochemically distinct subterritories in the ventral pallidum and adjacent
parts of the rostroventral forebrain. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 364, 340–362.
Zhang, Y., Burk, J. A., Glode, B. M., & Mair, R. G. (1998). Effects of thalamic and olfactory cortical lesions on continuous olfactory delayed
nonmatching-to-sample and olfactory discrimination in rats (Rattus norvegicus). Behavioral Neuroscience, 112, 39–53.

Zhang, Y. Q., Tang, J. S., & Yuan, B. (1996). Inhibitory effects of electrical stimulation of thalamic nucleus submedius on the nociceptive
responses of spinal dorsal horn neurons in the rat. Brain Research,
737, 16–24.
Zhang, Y. Q., Tang, J. S., Yuan, B., & Jia, H. (1995a). Inhibitory effects of
electrical stimulation of thalamic nucleus submedius area on the rat
tail flick reflex. Brain Research, 696, 205–212.
Zhang, Y. Q., Tang, J. S., Yuan, B., & Jia, H. (1995b). Effects of thalamic nucleus submedius lesions on the tail flick reflex inhibition
evoked by hindlimb electrical stimulation in the rat. NeuroReport,
6, 1237–1240.
Zhang, Y. Q., Tang, J. S., Yuan, B., & Jia, H. (1997a). Inhibitory effects of
electrically evoked activation of ventrolateral orbital cortex on the
tail-flick reflex are mediated by periaqueductal gray in rats. Pain,
72, 127–135.
Zhang, S., Tang, J. S., Yuan, B., & Jia, H. (1997b). Involvement of the
frontal ventrolateral orbital cortex in descending inhibition of nociception mediated by the periaqueductal gray in rats. Neuroscience
Letters, 224, 142–146.
Zhang, S., Tang, J. S., Yuan, B., & Jia, H. (1998). Inhibitory effects of
glutamate-induced activation of thalamic nucleus submedius are
mediated by ventrolateral orbital cortex and periaqueductal gray
in rats. European Journal of Pain, 2, 153–163.
Zhang, Z. W., & Deschênes, M. (1998). Projections to layer VI of the
posteromedial barrel field in the rat: A reappraisal of the role of
corticothalamic pathways. Cerebral Cortex, 8, 428–436.

IV.   DIENCEPHALON, BASAL GANGLIA, AMYGDALA, AND SEPTUM

