Progress in Brain Research, Vol. 149
ISSN 0079-6123
Copyright ß 2005 Elsevier BV. All rights reserved

CHAPTER 9

Thalamic relays and cortical functioning
S. Murray Sherman*
Department of Neurobiology, Pharmacology & Physiology,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA

Abstract: Studies on the visual thalamic relays, the lateral geniculate nucleus and pulvinar, provide three key properties
that have dramatically changed the view that the thalamus serves as a simple relay to get information from subcortical
sites to cortex. First, the retinal input, although a small minority (7%) in terms of numbers of synapses onto geniculate
relay cells, dominates receptive ﬁeld properties of these relay cells and strongly drives them; 93% of input thus is
nonretinal and modulates the relay in dynamic and important ways related to behavioral state, including attention. We
call the retinal input the driver input and the nonretinal, modulator input, and their unique morphological and
functional diﬀerences allow us to recognize driver and modulator input to many other thalamic relays. Second, much of
the modulation is related to control of a voltage-gated, low threshold Ca2+ conductance that determines response
properties of relay cells — burst or tonic — and this, among other things, aﬀects the salience of information relayed.
Third, the lateral geniculate nucleus and pulvinar (a massive but generally mysterious and ignored thalamic relay), are
examples of two diﬀerent types of relay: the LGN is a ﬁrst order relay, transmitting information from a subcortical
driver source (retina), while the pulvinar is mostly a higher order relay, transmitting information from a driver source
emanating from layer 5 of one cortical area to another area. Higher order relays seem especially important to general
corticocortical communication, and this view challenges the conventional dogma that such communication is based on
direct corticocortical connections. In this sense, any new information reaching a cortical area, whether from a
subcortical source or another cortical area, beneﬁts from a thalamic relay. Other examples of ﬁrst and higher order
relays also exist, and generally higher order relays represent the majority of thalamus. A ﬁnal property of interest
emphasized in chapter 17 by Guillery (2005) is that most or all driver inputs to thalamus, whether from a subcortical
source or from layer 5 of cortex, are axons that branch, with the extrathalamic branch innervating a motor or premotor
region in the brainstem, or in some cases, spinal cord. This suggests that actual information relayed by thalamus to
cortex is actually a copy of motor instructions (Guillery, 2005). Overall, these features of thalamic relays indicate that
the thalamus not only provides a behaviorally relevant, dynamic control over the nature of information relayed, it also
plays a key role in basic corticocortical communication.

Introduction

constantly a major focus of neuroscience research,
but that has not been so. Indeed, we have recently
emerged from the dark ages of thinking about
thalamus: the prevalent idea being that its main
purpose during normal waking behavior was simply
to relay information from the periphery to cortex, a
relay function that was machine-like, unvarying, and
rather boring. According to this view, the thalamus
only behaved in an interesting fashion during sleep
or certain pathological conditions, such as epilepsy
(Steriade and Llinaa´s, 1988; Steriade et al., 1993;

Virtually all information reaching cortex, and thus
conscious perception, must first pass through thalamus. It thus follows that the thalamus sits in a strategically vital position for brain functioning. One would
think this enough to ensure that the thalamus was

*Tel.: þ1-773-834-2900; Fax: þ1-773-702-3774;
E-mail: msherman@bsd.uchicago.edu
DOI: 10.1016/S0079-6123(05)49009-3

107

108

McCormick and Bal, 1997), but this aspect of
thalamic functioning, while interesting and still
viable, is beyond the scope of the present study.
Rather, the focus here is on the more recent finding
that the thalamus plays an interesting and dynamic
role during normal, waking behavior of the animal,
and there are three aspects to this. First, it is considered that the thalamus provides a changeable relay
of information to cortex, the purpose of which is to
adjust the nature of relayed information to varying
behavioral demands. Second, the thalamus serves not
only to relay peripheral information to cortex, but
it continues to play a vital role in further cortical
processing of this information by acting as a central
link in various corticothalamocortical routes of information processing. Third, most or all inputs to thalamus that are relayed to cortex carry information
about ongoing motor instructions, so that the main
role of thalamic relays is to provide a copy to cortex
of these instructions. This last point has enormous
implications for cortical functioning, and has been
discussed in detail in Chapter 17 of this book
(Guillery, 2005).
The vast majority of detailed information we have
about the cell and circuit properties of the thalamus
comes from studies of the lateral geniculate nucleus,
which is the thalamic relay of retinal input to cortex.
Studies of the lateral geniculate nucleus derive mostly
from carnivores, rodents, and primates. Fortunately,
this nucleus has served as an excellent model for
thalamus, and all of the major concepts learned from
study of this relay that are described below apply
widely to thalamus.

Relay functions of the thalamus
One question that remains relevant and profound is:
Why does information destined for cortex need to
pass through a thalamic relay? Why, for instance,
does retinal information pass through the lateral
geniculate nucleus instead of projecting directly to
cortex? If one looks at information processing in the
visual system, it is clear that as one progresses up the
hierarchical ladder across the various synaptic zones
in retina, the receptive fields of cells become richer
and more complex, and this also occurs as one
ascends the various hierarchical steps within visual
cortex (reviewed in Dowling, 1970, 1987; Hubel and

Wiesel, 1977; van Essen, 1979, 1985; van Essen and
Maunsell, 1983; van Essen et al., 1992). These
increasingly elaborate receptive fields represent the
processing of visual information, and especially
elaborate receptive fields in cortex are thought to
underlie specific perceptual processes. For instance,
the complex receptive fields in the middle temporal
cortical area in monkeys are thought to be a key
neural substrate for the processing of visual motion
(Britten et al., 1993; O’Keefe and Movshon, 1998;
Grunewald et al., 2002; Kohn and Movshon, 2003;
Osborne et al., 2004).
The one synapse across which there is virtually no
receptive field elaboration is the retinogeniculate
synapse (Hubel and Wiesel, 1961; Sherman, 1985;
Sherman and Guillery, 1996). A similar pattern holds
for the other main sensory systems involving a
thalamic relay1: somatosensory information involves
little or no receptive field elaboration across the
synapse from the medial lemniscus to the ventral
posterior nucleus, and likewise there is essentially no
such elaboration across the synapse from the inferior
colliculus to the medial geniculate nucleus, although
in both systems there is significant receptive field
elaboration across synapses peripheral to thalamus
and within the cortex (Purves et al., 1997; Kandel
et al., 2000).
These observations used to be viewed as evidence
that not much was happening in thalamus during
normal information processing, leading to the abovementioned ‘‘dark ages’’ for thalamic enquiry. In fact,
this pattern is now interpreted to mean that the
thalamus has an absolutely unique role to play in
information processing. That is, while other subcortical and cortical stages involved have a function
that is related to receptive field elaboration, the
thalamus does something completely different. It
controls the flow of information to cortex. Indeed,
the complex cell and circuit properties controlling

1

The olfactory system is unusual in that information passes
from a subcortical to a cortical level without a thalamic relay,
although the cortex in this case is paleocortex rather than
neocortex. There is a higher level olfactory input to the medial
dorsal nucleus of the thalamus which may be relayed to frontal
neocortex, but it is not clear whether this is the only entry of
olfactory information to cortex or whether a nonthalamic route
from paleocortex to neocortex exists.

109

relay cell responses contradict the notion that the
thalamus behaves as a simple relay.

Thalamic relay cell properties
Like all other brain neurons, thalamic relay cells
possess many membrane conductances controlled by
membrane voltage or specific ion concentrations, in
addition to synaptic activity. This supplies the cell
with a highly variable, dynamic range of responses
that thereby varies the nature of information relayed
to cortex. A detailed discussion of all these properties
is beyond the scope of the present account and can be
found elsewhere (McCormick and Huguenard, 1992;
Sherman and Guillery, 1996, 2001). The focus here is
a voltage gated Ca2+ conductance involving a T type
Ca2+ channel found in the cell body and dendrites
that, when activated, leads to an inward current, IT.

Tonic and burst firing modes
Figure 1 shows the basic voltage dependence of IT
(Jahnsen and Llinaa´s, 1984a,b; McCormick and
Huguenard, 1992; Sherman and Guillery, 1996,
2001; Smith et al., 1998; Zhan et al., 1999; Gutierrez
et al., 2001). Anyone who understands the basic properties of the Na+/K+ action potential, will appreciate that the properties of IT are qualitatively
identical to those of the Naþ channel involved with
the action potential, albeit with important quantitative differences. Like the Na+ channel, the T type
Ca2+ channel has two voltage sensitive gates, activation and inactivation gates, and both must be open
for Ca2+ to flow into the cell. The sequence of events
is shown in Fig. 1 starting at the lower left panel and
moving clockwise:
(1) At a relatively hyperpolarized membrane
potential (Vm), more than about 5 mV below
rest, the inactivation gate is open, but the
activation gate is closed, and there is no IT. In
this condition, IT is said to have its inactivation removed, or it is ‘‘deinactivated’’, but
because the activation gate is closed, it is also
deactivated.
(2) Depolarization above threshold (roughly À65
mV to À60 mV) then rapidly opens the activation gate, and Ca2+ flows into the cell in the

form of IT. This creates a depolarizing, all-ornone Ca2+ spike that propagates through the
dendritic tree and cell body, but not the axon,
which lacks a sufficient concentration of these
channels. IT is thus activated.
(3) After a period of sustained depolarization
lasting for $100 ms2, the inactivation gate
closes, and thus IT is now inactivated. A
variety of slower, non-inactivating K+ conductances also come into play, and this plus IT
inactivation serves to repolarize the cell.
(4) Even though it is back at the starting membrane potential, IT remains inactivated for
$100 ms. After this time, the inactivation of
IT is removed (i.e., it becomes deinactivated).
The cycle is then reset as the initial starting
conditions as in panel 1 are re-established.
There are several implications to the above. First,
while activation of IT is very fast, both inactivation
and deinactivation take time, on the order of 100 ms.
For inactivation, this means that a typical, fast
excitatory post-synaptic potential (EPSP) or even an
action potential will not much inactivate IT. Likewise,
for deinactivation, a fast inhibitory post-synaptic
potential (IPSP) will not do. For either process, it is
necessary to sustain a change in Vm. Second, the
all-or-none Ca2+ spike created when IT is activated
propagates through the dendrites and soma, but not
up the axon, because there are virtually no T channels
there. Nonetheless, as shown in more detail below,
this spike does affect the pattern of conventional
action potentials generated and thus will affect the
signal sent up the axon to cortex. This Ca2+ spike is
commonly called the ‘‘low threshold spike’’, because
its activation threshold is hyperpolarized with respect
to that of the action potential. This means that, with
some exceptions (Gutierrez et al., 2001), if IT is
deinactivated, a ensuing depolarization will activate
IT and the low threshold spike before activating a
conventional action potential. Third, as noted, the T
channel behaves qualitatively just like the Na+
channel involved in the action potential — both
2

Actually, inactivation and deinactivation are complex
functions of voltage and time so that the more the cell is
depolarized, the faster IT inactivates, and the more the cell is
hyperpolarized, the faster IT deinactivates.

110

Fig. 1. Schematic view of actions of voltage dependent T (Ca2+) and K+ channels underlying low threshold Ca2+ spike. The 4
numbered panels show the sequence of channel events in a clockwise fashion, and the central graph shows the eﬀects on membrane
potential. The T channel has 2 voltage dependent gates: an activation gate that opens with depolarization and closes at hyperpolarized
levels; and an inactivation gate that shows the opposite voltage dependency. Both of these gates must be open for Ca2+ to enter the cell,
and this ﬂow of Ca2+ is an inward current known as IT. The K+ channel shown is really a heterogenous conglomeration of diﬀerent
K+ channels with only a single gate that opens during depolarization; thus, these channels do not inactivate. (1). At a relatively
hyperpolarized resting membrane potential ($ 70 mV), the inactivation gate of the T channel is open, and so the T channel is
deinactivated, but the activation gate is closed. The single gate for the K+ channel is closed. (2) With suﬃcient depolarization to reach
its threshold, the activation gate of the T channel opens, and Ca2+ ﬂows into the cell, producing IT. The T channel is now activated.
This further depolarizes the cell, providing the rise of the low threshold spike, which is all-or-none. (3) The inactivation gate of the T
channel closes after $ 100 ms of depolarization, and so the channel is now inactivated. The K+ channel also opens. These actions
repolarize the cell. (4) Even though the initial resting potential is reached, the T channel remains inactivated, because it takes $100 ms
of hyperpolarization to deinactivate it. Eventually, the T channel deinactivates, and the conditions of panel 1 are restored. Note that
the behavior of the T channel qualitatively matches that of the Na+ channel involved with the action potential, but with several
quantitative diﬀerences: the T channel is slower to inactivate and deinactivate, and it operates in a more hyperpolarized regime.

channels inactivate with a similar voltage dependency
and the time required for deinactivation establishes a refractory period — but there are important
quantitative differences. Thus the T channel has a
much slower time course for inactivation and deinactivation, a longer duration spike, a more

hyperpolarized regime (by about 10 mV), and little
or no distribution in the axon.
Figure 2 shows some of the functional implications
of IT. When the cell has been sufficiently depolarized,
IT is inactivated and plays no role in the cell’s
response. Now, a suprathreshold excitatory input

111

Fig. 2. Various properties of the low threshold Ca2+ spike. A, B: Intracellular recording of a relay cell from the lateral geniculate
nucleus of a cat in vitro. At an initial Vm of À59 mV, IT is inactivated and thus the cell responds in tonic mode (A). Thus, the response
to a depolarizing 3 nA current injection is a steady stream of unitary action potentials. At an initial Vm of À70 mV, IT is deinactivated
and thus the cell responds in burst mode (B). Now, the very same current injection activates the low threshold Ca2+ spike, which in
turn activates, in this case, a burst of 8 conventional action potentials. C: Initial response of cell in A, B to various levels of current
injection from diﬀerent initial Vms. At levels that inactivate IT and produce tonic ﬁring (À47 mV and À59 mV), a fairly linear
relationship ensues. At levels that deinactivate IT and produce burst ﬁring (À77 mV and À83 mV), a very nonlinear relationship in the
form of a step function is seen. D,E: Eﬀect of ﬁring mode on response to drifting sinusoidal grating from a relay cell in the lateral
geniculate nucleus of an anesthetized cat recorded intracellularly in vivo. The sinusoidal contrast changes in the visual stimulus are
shown below the histograms and is also shown as a gray dashed line for the lower histograms of D,E. At an initial Vm (À65 mV) that
promotes tonic ﬁring (D), the spontaneous activity is relatively high, and the response to the grating has a sinusoidal proﬁle. At an
initial Vm (À75 mV) that promotes burst ﬁring (E), the spontaneous activity is relatively low, and the response to the grating no longer
has a sinusoidal proﬁle.

112

(a current injection in this example, but think of it
also as an EPSP) evokes a steady stream of unitary
action potentials (Fig. 2A). This is called the tonic
mode of firing. However, when the same cell is
sufficiently hyperpolarized so that IT is deinactivated,
the exact same excitatory input produces a very
different response (Fig. 2B): now IT is activated, producing the all-or-none low threshold spike, which is
large enough to elicit a high frequency volley of action
potentials. This is called the burst mode of firing,
and the burst typically includes 2–6 action potentials,
although up to 10 or more may be involved. The
important point is that the same excitatory input
elicits two different messages relayed to cortex (i.e.,
the action potentials) depending on the recent voltage history of the cell, which in turn determines the
state of IT.
Both response modes, burst and tonic, are seen in
thalamic relay cells during normal waking behavior.
Thus burst firing has also been reported in awake,
alert animals for lateral geniculate cells in response to
visual stimuli (Guido and Weyand, 1995; Ramcharan
et al., 2000; Weyand et al., 2001); for medial geniculate cells in response to auditory stimuli (Massaux
et al., 2004); and for the ventral posterior medial cells
during periods of active whisking (Nicolelis et al.,
1995; Fanselow and Nicolelis, 1999; Swadlow and
Gusev, 2001; Swadlow et al., 2002). Such burst firing
has also been reported in various thalamic nuclei
of humans during wakefulness (Lenz et al., 1998;
Radhakrishnan et al., 1999). Generally, the more
awake and alert the animal, the more tonic firing
dominates (Ramcharan et al., 2000; Swadlow and
Gusev, 2001; Massaux et al., 2004). This means that
relay cells switch frequently between modes, reflecting
a change in Vm sufficient to change the inactivation
state of IT. A major challenge is to define the
conditions and mechanisms for this switching, and
some preliminary insights into this are presented
below. Another challenge is to understand the significance for information processing of the response
mode, and part of this is introduced in Figs. 2C–E.

Implications of firing mode for thalamic relays
Note that, in the case of tonic firing (Fig. 2A), the
action potentials are evoked directly from the
depolarizing current injection. Thus one would

expect that the larger the current injection, the greater
the response. This is in fact the case, as shown in
Fig. 2C for tonic firing for this cell (responses at
initially depolarized Vm of À47 and À59 mV), where
the input/output relationship is relatively linear.
However, with burst firing (Fig. 2B), the action
potentials are no longer directly caused by the current
injection but instead result from the low threshold
Ca2þ spike; because this is an all-or-none spike, a
larger current injection would not evoke a larger low
threshold Ca2þ spike, and thus a larger current
injection would not evoke more action potentials.
This relationship for burst firing is shown in Fig. 2C
(responses at initially depolarized Vm of À77 and À83
mV), where the input/output relationship is a decidedly nonlinear step function. Thus tonic firing represents a much more linear relay than does burst firing.
Another way of determining the effect of firing
mode on the thalamic relay is to see its effect on
response properties of the relay cell as determined by
receptive field analysis: this reflects how incoming
information is relayed to the cortex. Figs 2D, E shows
a prototypical example of this. The example is from
a lateral geniculate relay cell recorded intracellularly
in vivo in an anesthetized cat, and shown is the
spontaneous activity plus the visual responses evoked
by a sinusoidal grating (i.e., a visual stimulus of
constant luminance along one axis and of sinusoidally
modulated luminance along the perpendicular axis)
drifting through the receptive field of the cell. By
injecting constant current of different amplitudes, the
cell was biased either toward a more depolarized
initial Vm, producing tonic firing (Fig. 2D) or toward
a more hyperpolarized initial Vm, producing burst
firing (Fig. 2E). During tonic firing, the profile of
the response to the visual stimulus looks sinusoidal
(Fig. 2D, lower histogram), like the stimulus itself,
and thus there is a close correlation between firing
rate and stimulus contrast (compare the firing with
the superimposed stimulus contrast represented by the
dashed, gray curve). This is another way of saying
that the response is very linear. The visual response
to the same stimulus during burst firing is quite
different, because it no longer is sinusoidal in shape
(Fig. 2E, lower histogram). This nonlinearity
during burst firing is predicted from the nonlinear
input/output relationship of burst firing depicted in
Fig. 2C.

113

The advantage of tonic firing and its more linear
relay is self-evident, because the type of nonlinear
distortion imposed on the relay by burst firing limits
the extent to which visual cortex can faithfully
reconstruct the visual scene. Any advantage of burst
firing is harder to discern, but one such advantage is
tied to spontaneous activity (i.e., background firing
or responsiveness when there is no visual stimulus
present). As shown in the upper histograms of
Figs. 2D, E, this is considerably lower during burst
firing. Because spontaneous activity represents responsiveness that, by definition, bears no relationship
to a visual stimulus, it actually represents noise in the
relay to cortex. The response to the visual stimulus
(Figs. 2D, E, lower histograms) is the signal, which is
quite large in both firing modes. What is of interest
here is the signal-to-noise ratio, which, chiefly
because of the lower noise during burst firing, is
higher during burst firing. A higher signal-to-noise
ratio is often associated with stimulus detectability.
This suggestion of improved detectability during
burst firing has been supported experimentally
(Guido et al., 1995).
However, not only does burst firing improve stimulus detectability, it also provides for a more powerful activation of cortex. To understand the reason for
this, it helps to look at the special pattern of firing
seen in burst mode, a pattern revealed by plotting a
two-dimensional interspike interval distribution on
logarithmic axes (Fig. 3). This plot shows that groups
of action potentials are clustered and not spread
evenly in time. In particular, the cluster at the lower
right (in the shaded area) represents the first action
potentials of bursts due to low threshold Ca2+ spikes.
The second to penultimate action potentials in a burst
are indicated by the cluster at the lower left of each
histogram, and the last action potentials in a burst are
found at the left side of each histogram. All other
action potentials are during tonic firing. The criteria
developed for the first action potentials in a burst are
represented by the shaded area: the action potential
must follow a silent period of !100 ms and be
followed by the next action potential within 2ms
(Lu et al., 1992), and minor variants of these criteria
exist (e.g., Lenz et al., 1998; Zirh et al., 1998). The
reason for this is as follows. In order for a burst to
occur, IT must be activated to produce the underlying low threshold spike. For this to happen, IT must

first be deinactivated, and that requires !100 ms
or so of sustained hyperpolarization. The sustained
hyperpolarization means that, by definition, there
can be no evoked action potentials, and so this
requirement to deinactivate IT leads to a silent
period of !100 ms before the first spike in a burst.
In contrast to the clusters related to burst firing, the
action potentials evoked during tonic firing tend to
occupy one cloud of points with interspike intervals
relatively evenly distributed, mostly between 5 and
30 ms.
One significance of this distribution of action
potentials during the two firing modes has to do
with properties of the thalamocortical synapse, which
shows paired-pulse depression (Stratford et al., 1996;

Fig. 3. Two-dimensional interspike interval plots for two
representative relay cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus of
an anesthetized cat recorded extracellularly in vivo. For each
action potential recorded during a given period of time, the
interval to the previous spike is shown on the abscissa, and the
interval to the next spike is shown on the ordinate. Tonic and
burst spikes are shown separately. Note the cluster of burst
spikes on the lower right of each histogram. These follow a
silent period of !100 ms and are followed by another spike
within $ 2 ms. These are known to be the ﬁrst spike in a burst
(Lu et al., 1992). For further details see text.

114

Beierlein and Connors, 2002; Castro-Alamancos and
Oldford, 2002; Chung et al., 2002; Nicolelis, 2002).
This means that for a period of time following an
evoked EPSP from this synapse, EPSP amplitudes
will be substantially depressed. However, for most of
these synapses, a silent period of !100 ms as occurs
before the first action potential in a burst would
relieve the depression and lead to a maximum EPSP.
In contrast, tonic firing has interspike intervals that
are generally too brief to permit much relief of
the depression, so the synapse will be considerably
depressed throughout tonic firing. Recent work
studying efficacy of the thalamocortical synapse in
the somatosensory system of the awake rabbit has
shown that, on average, the first action potential in
a burst is much more effective at driving cortical
circuitry than is a tonic action potential (Swadlow
and Gusev, 2001; Swadlow et al., 2002, 2005). This
does not even take into account that the following
action potentials in a burst will produce extra EPSPs,
that, while depressed, would temporally sum and
enhance the response. The result is that a burst
punches through to cortex very effectively compared
to tonic action potentials.3
These different features related to firing mode —
a more linear relay for tonic firing versus better
stimulus detectability and cortical activation for burst
firing — have suggested what remains a working
hypothesis for further research (Sherman, 1996, 2001;
Sherman and Guillery, 2002, 2004). That is, burst
firing acts as a ‘‘wake-up call’’ for periods during
which the relevant relay cells are relatively suppressed, as may happen during periods of general
inattention or drowsiness or when an alert animal
directs its attention elsewhere. Under these conditions, the idea is that any change in the afferent
input, such as a new visual stimulus for a lateral
geniculate relay cell, evokes a burst that ‘‘wakes up’’

cortex with a signal that something has changed out
there. This could then lead to a switch in the relay to
tonic firing so that information about the changed
environment can be relayed more linearly and thus
more faithfully.
There is some very limited, indirect evidence
consistent with this view (for details, see Sherman,
1996, 2001; Sherman and Guillery, 2002, 2004). One is
that, as noted above, thalamic relay cells in a variety
of nuclei and species (including rats, rabbits, cats,
monkeys, and humans) show both tonic and burst
firing during the animal’s waking behavior, although
in the alert animal bursting occurs much less frequently than does tonic firing (Guido and Weyand,
1995; Nicolelis et al., 1995; Lenz et al., 1998;
Fanselow and Nicolelis, 1999; Radhakrishnan et al.,
1999; Ramcharan et al., 2000; Swadlow and Gusev,
2001; Weyand et al., 2001; Swadlow et al., 2002;
Massaux et al., 2004). Also, the amount of bursting
increases as the animal becomes drowsy
or inattentive, which is consistent with the hypothesis that bursting serves as suggested as a ‘‘wake-up
call’’ (Ramcharan et al., 2000; Swadlow and Gusev,
2001; Massaux et al., 2004). It follows that such
‘‘wake-up calls’’ are especially important when the
animal is drowsy or otherwise inattentive for
the information being relayed through thalamus.
Finally, recordings from lateral geniculate relay cells
in the awake cat suggest a tendency for bursting to
the first presentation of a novel stimulus with a
switch to tonic firing as the stimulus remains
(Guido and Weyand, 1995), and this, too, is consistent with the hypothesis.
For this to make sense, there must be thalamic
circuitry available to control response mode efficiently, and this indeed is the case.

Thalamic circuit properties
3

This scenario assumes that thalamocortical synapses show
paired-pulse depression. However, the beauty of burst ﬁring is
that one would expect bursts to activate cortex more powerfully
than tonic ﬁring even if the thalamocortical synapse shows
paired-pulse facilitation. This is because facilitation works well
for short interspike intervals, and the short interspike intervals
in a burst ensure considerable facilitation. Just as the interspike
intervals during tonic ﬁring are too short to relieve a depressed
synapse, they are generally too long to produce facilitation for a
facilitating synapse.

Pattern of inputs to relay cells
Figure 4A schematically shows the various afferents
that synapse onto relay cells; again the lateral
geniculate nucleus is the example, but with relatively
minor variations in the equivalent of the nonretinal
afferents, the circuitry is similar for other thalamic
relays, with the major change being the nature of the

115

Fig. 4. Innervation patterns for the lateral geniculate nucleus. A: Inputs to relay cells, showing transmitters and post-synaptic
receptors (ionotropic and metabotropic) involved. B, C: Two patterns among others possible for corticothalamic projection from layer
6 to reticular and relay cells. Simple excitation and feedforward inhibition is shown in B, and C shows a more complicated pattern in
which activation of a cortical axon can excite some relay cells directly and inhibit others through activation of reticular cells. (ACh,
acetylcholine; GABA, g-aminobutyric acid; Glu, glutamate; LGN, lateral geniculate nucleus; NO, nitric oxide; PBR, parabrachial
region; TRN, thalamic reticular nucleus.) For further details see text.

input to be relayed (e.g., instead of retinal input for
the lateral geniculate nucleus, there would be medial
lemniscal or inferior collicular input for the ventral
posterior nucleus or medial geniculate nucleus, respectively, or, as noted below, cortical input from layer
5 for higher order relays).
Figure 4A, in addition to showing the inputs,
also indicates the transmitters and post-synaptic

receptors involved. There are two general classes of
receptor: ionotropic and metabotropic. Ionotropic
receptors relevant to Fig. 4A include AMPA and
NMDA receptors (AMPARs and NMDARs) for
glutamate, nicotinic receptors (nAChRs) for acetylcholine, and GABAA receptors (GABAARs); metabotropic receptors include various metabotropic
glutamate receptors (mGluRs), various muscarinic

116

receptors (mAChRs) for acetylcholine, and GABAB
receptors (GABABRs). Detailed differences between
these receptor classes can be found elsewhere (Nicoll
et al., 1990; Mott and Lewis, 1994; Pin and Bockaert,
1995; Pin and Duvoisin, 1995; Recasens and Vignes,
1995; Conn and Pin, 1997; Conn, 2003; Huettner,
2003), but for the purposes here, only several differences are considered: ionotropic receptors are simpler, usually with an ion channel directly linked to the
receptor complex so that when the receptor binds to
a transmitter, rapid opening of the channel ensues.
Post-synaptic potentials (PSPs) from activation of
ionotropic receptors tend to have a short latency ($ 1
ms) and duration (mostly over in 10–20 ms). In
contrast, metabotropic receptors are more complicated: each is linked to a G-protein, and transmitter
binding to the receptor releases the G-protein and sets
off a chain of biochemical reactions (also known as
second messenger actions) that create many intracellular changes. Among them is the opening or
closing of ion channels, which in the case of the
receptors shown in Fig. 4A are usually K+ channels.
Opening the K+ channel allows more positive (K+)
ions to leave the cell, leading to an IPSP, and closing
the channel does the opposite, producing an EPSP.
What is more important in the present context is
that the PSPs evoked via metabotropic receptors
in the relay cells are slow, with a latency of 10 ms or
so and a duration of hundreds of ms to several
seconds. Recall that a change in Vm for !100 ms or
so is needed for inactivation or deinactivation of IT,
and thus the fast PSPs related to ionotropic receptors
are ill-suited for this (and so are action potentials,
which are over in a ms or so). In contrast, the
sustained PSPs of the metabotropic receptors are
ideal for control of IT. That is, the sustained EPSP
related to the mGluR or the mAChR serves well to
inactivate IT and convert burst firing to tonic;
similarly, the sustained IPSP of the GABABR will
deinactivate IT and convert tonic firing to burst.
These actions of metabotropic receptors are not
limited to control of IT: the sustained PSPs will also
serve to control other slower voltage gated conductances that exist, such as Ih and IA (for details of these
other conductances, see McCormick and Huguenard,
1992; Sherman and Guillery, 1996, 2001), and the
sustained alterations in Vm will also affect the overall
excitability of the relay cell.

Thalamic circuitry and control of IT
Figure 4A shows that the retinal input activates only
ionotropic receptors, mainly AMPARs4, and this has
two consequences. First, the brief EPSP means that
up to relatively high rates of firing in the retinal
afferent(s), individual action potentials presynaptically can be converted to discrete EPSPs. Put
another way, a sustained EPSP (e.g., from activation
of an mGluR) would act like a low-pass temporal
filter in relaying the retinal input, so that temporal
information would be lost in the relay at higher input
firing frequencies. Thus the fact that the retinal input
activates only ionotropic receptors maximizes the
relay of temporal information. The second implication of this pattern of receptors is that retinally
evoked EPSPs, being relatively brief, would have
relatively little effect on IT. Only at rates of retinal
firing sufficiently high to produce temporal summation of EPSPs would this input serve to inactivate
IT. The implication here is that a cell in burst mode
could be switched to tonic mode by high rates of
retinal firing, but otherwise, response mode of the
relay cell is better controlled by inputs that activate
metabotropic receptors.
Indeed, activation in the relay cell of either
mGluRs or mAChRs from cortex or the parabrachial
region, respectively, produces a sustained EPSP that
inactivates IT and serves to switch firing mode from
burst to tonic. Activation of GABABRs from the
thalamic reticular nucleus (and possibly from interneurons, but the nature of receptors post-synaptic to
interneuron inputs remains largely unexplored) does
the opposite by producing a sustained EPSP that
deinactivates IT and switches firing mode from tonic
to burst. Thus the two major extrathalamic, nonretinal inputs to the lateral geniculate nucleus — from
cortex and the parabrachial region — control firing
mode fairly effectively: the direct inputs to relay cells
from both can promote tonic firing, and indirect

4

Any role of NMDARs here is complicated by their voltage
dependency, so that they will not contribute to an EPSP unless
the cell is already fairly depolarized (Mayer and Westbrook,
1987; Nakanishi et al., 1998; Ozawa et al., 1998; Qian and
Johnson, 2002). The role of NMDARs in control of IT remains
unclear.

117

inputs involving the thalamic reticular nucleus (and,
perhaps, interneurons) can promote burst firing.
However, there are important differences in these
inputs. As noted in Fig. 4A, parabrachial axons branch
to innervate relay cells and both types of local
GABAergic inhibitory cell (reticular cells and interneurons). The main effect on relay cells is excitatory
while the simultaneous effect on the local inhibitory
cells is inhibitory. This neat trick is effected by different post-synaptic receptors: mainly nAChRs and the
M1 type of mAChR on relay cells to produce EPSPs
and the M2 type of mAChRs on the GABAergic cells
to produce IPSPs. This means that activity in these
inputs has a straightforward depolarizing effect on
relay cells due to direct excitation and indirect disinibition (i.e., inhibition of the GABAergic inputs), and
this in turn implies that the more active these inputs,
the more likely the relay cells fire in tonic mode.
The effect of cortical inputs is less obvious,
because, according to Fig. 4A, it can produce direct
excitation and indirect inhibition. Here, much
depends on the details of circuitry, details of which
are very little known, and this point is illustrated in
Figs. 4B, C. If the corticothalamic circuitry is organized in a simple feedforward inhibitory circuit
(Fig. 4B), then the net result of cortical activation
will be relatively balanced increases in EPSPs and
IPSPs. This would likely have little overall effect on
Vm and thus on IT. However, recent evidence (Chance
et al., 2002; Abbott, 2005) suggests that such a
balanced increase in EPSPs and IPSPs, while slightly
affecting Vm, will increase synaptic conductance; this
in turn reduces neuronal input resistance, making the
relay cell less responsive to other (e.g., retinal) inputs.
In this way, the circuitry of Fig. 4B can serve as a gain
control mechanism. Fig. 4C shows another possible
arrangement, and here the result of corticothalamic
activation is quite different. For any specific cortical
axon (or, perhaps, a small related group), activation
will directly depolarize some relay cells (represented
by cell 2), inactivating IT to promote tonic firing, and
indirectly hyperpolarize others (represented by cells 1
and 3), deinactivating IT to promote burst firing.
While there is some evidence for the arrangement
shown in Fig. 4C (Tsumoto et al., 1978), it is plausible
that heterogeneity exists in the corticothalamic circuits, so that those shown in Fig. 4B,C, as well as
others not shown, exist.

Role of thalamus in corticocortical communication
The discussion in the previous section offers some
functions for the thalamus to perform in relaying
information to cortex, and other functions will
doubtless be added as we learn more about this
topic. This section examines the case that thalamus
does more than just relay peripheral information to
cortex; instead, it continues to play a role in how
cortex processes such information. The logic underlying these arguments begins with a consideration of
inputs to thalamic relay cells.

Drivers and modulators
Functional differences
A glance back at Fig. 4A shows that there are multiple
inputs to lateral geniculate relay cells, yet only one of
these, the retinal input, represents the information
actually relayed. What are all the nonretinal inputs
doing? A consideration of numbers only adds to the
mystery, because the presumably dominant retinal
input contributes only 7% of the synaptic inputs to
relay cells; the rest are contributed roughly equally,
about 30% each, from local GABAergic sources,
from layer 6 of cortex, and from the parabrachial
region (van Horn et al., 2000). Small numbers of
serotonergic, noradrenergic, and histaminergic inputs
are also present (reviewed in Sherman and Guillery,
1996, 2001) but are not considered further here.
The point is that not all physical inputs are equal,
as if they participate in some sort of anatomical
and functional democracy. Indeed, the retinal inputs,
despite the number, produce disproportionately large
EPSPs in relay cells.
In terms of the lateral geniculate nucleus, there are
a number of criteria that distinguish the retinal input
from the nonretinal (Sherman and Guillery, 1996,
1998, 2001):
 Retinal inputs to relay cells provide the main
receptive field properties and are necessary for
the existence of the receptive fields, whereas
nonretinal inputs produce only subtle changes
in receptive field properties.

118

 Retinal inputs end in very large terminals,
indeed by far the largest in the thalamus, and
contribute up to 10 or more distinct synaptic
contact zones. The smaller nonretinal terminals
rarely have more than one synaptic contact zone
each.
 Retinal terminals are limited to proximal dendrites, often in complex synaptic arrangements
known as triads found within elaborate synaptic
glomeruli, whereas modulator terminals can be
found anywhere on the dendritic arbor.
 As noted, despite the small number of synapses,
retinal EPSPs are large, suggesting powerful
synapses, whereas individual nonretinal inputs
are weak.
 Again as noted, retinal inputs activate only
ionotropic glutamate receptors, whereas nonretinal inputs typically activate metabotropic
receptors as well.
 There is relatively little convergence of retinal inputs onto relay cells, whereas many or
most nonretinal inputs show considerable
convergence.
 Retinal inputs do not innervate the thalamic
reticular nucleus, whereas nonretinal inputs do.
 Retinal synapses show paired-pulse depression
(following an evoked retinal EPSP, further
EPSPs from retina are reduced in amplitude
for 50–100 ms or so), whereas corticogeniculate
synapses, the only nonretinal input so far tested
for this effect, show paired-pulse facilitation
(the opposite of depression, so that evoked
EPSPs for 50–100 ms or so are enhanced in
amplitude).
These systematic differences between retinal and
nonretinal inputs led to the concept that these
thalamic afferents could be divided into drivers and
modulators, the former being the retinal inputs, so
named because they strongly drive relay cells and
transmit the message that is processed by cortex, and
the latter being all other inputs, so named because
their role is to modulate retinogeniculate transmission. One example of this modulation, among many
others, is the abovementioned control of IT by cortical
and parabrachial input, both designated as modulators here. This division of afferents to relay cells into
drivers and modulators works well in other thalamic

relays for which sufficient information exists: for
instance the driver inputs to the ventral portion of
the medial geniculate nucleus or to the ventral posterior nucleus are, respectively, from the inferior
colliculus or the medial lemniscus. As with the retinal
input to the lateral geniculate nucleus, these other
drivers bring the information to be relayed and thus
confer the basic receptive field properties onto their
target relay cells.
This concept that not all anatomical pathways are
the same, and that some are important to the transmission of basic information (e.g., retinal inputs),
while others play a subtler role in modulating how
that information is transformed or relayed (e.g.,
nonretinal inputs), has a number of other implications
considered below. A particularly interesting possibility is that this distinction between drivers and
modulators can be extended beyond thalamus, for
instance, into cortex. There are reasons for thinking
this: there is now considerable evidence that the input
that confers the basic receptive field properties onto
layer 4 cells of primary visual cortex are the corticogeniculate axons (Hubel and Wiesel, 1962, 1977;
Ferster et al., 1996; Ferster and Miller, 2000; Usrey
et al., 2000; Alonso et al., 2001; Kara et al., 2002;
Ferster, 2004); these synapses have many of the
features of a driver from the bulleted list above,
including large EPSPs with paired-pulse depression
(Stratford et al., 1996), large terminals on proximal
dendrites; and these contribute only about 6% of the
synapses onto these layer 4 cells (Ahmed et al., 1994,
1997). As noted above, only 7% of input to geniculate
relay cells derives from retina, and thus the 6%
contribution made by geniculocortical inputs is
remarkably close to this value, suggesting either an
extraordinary coincidence or a common functional
feature of driver inputs. Below, we consider further
the possibility that other pathways in cortex can also
be divided into drivers and modulators.

Drivers and the labeled line
Given that retinal input to geniculate relay cells is the
defined driver and yet represents a minority of inputs,
we can ask: What is the consequence in cortex of a
change in geniculate firing produced by a modulator
input? This could happen, for instance, if a highly

119

active period of corticogeniculate input were to
elevate geniculate firing, although evidence cited
below suggests this happens only rarely. The suggested answer follows from the concept that a driver
input represents a ‘‘labeled line’’. This means that
altered firing of the geniculate relay cell must always
be interpreted by its cortical targets as due to altered
firing of the retinal inputs. This concept is very much
like the concept of labeled lines in sensory pathways.
For instance, if one applies pressure to the side of the
eyeball, the perception is of spots appearing in the
visual field. That is, the resultant increased intraocular pressure changes retinal firing, and this is
perceived not as a pressure change in the eye but
rather as a visual signal.
The same principle is suggested to apply to the
drivers throughout thalamus. If large numbers of
relay cell action potentials were due to modulator
inputs rather than drivers, this could create difficulties
in information processing. However, evidence from
the lateral geniculate nucleus suggests that this is rare:
that is, simultaneous recording from a geniculate
relay cell and its retinal input indicates that nearly
every action potential in a relay cell result from one in
its retinal afferent (Cleland et al., 1971; Usrey et al.,
1999), but the caution here is that these data derive
from anesthetized preparations.

Modulation via ionotropic receptors
The point made above is that an important feature of
modulator inputs to relay cells is that, as a group, they
activate metabotropic receptors, and the long PSPs
that result are key to controlling the state of many
slow acting, voltage-dependent conductances, such
as that involving IT. However, as shown in Fig. 4A,
most pathways activate ionotropic receptors as well,
and it is not clear if certain pathways, such as the
corticothalamic, reticulothalamic, or those from the
brainstem, include single axons that activate purely
one or the other type of receptor.
As noted in the context of Fig. 4B, Abbot and
colleagues have provided a clear modulatory role for
inputs that activate ionotropic receptors, whether or
not metabotropic receptors might also be involved
(Chance et al., 2002; Abbott, 2005). That is, combined
input from modulatory inhibitory and excitatory

sources balanced to have little net effect on Vm can
nonetheless affect neuronal input resistance and thus
affect the gain of any driver input. A different
modulatory role can also be imagined if the combined
input is unbalanced, leading to a change in Vm. This
would then lead to a change in spontaneous activity,
another key modulatory function that affects how
driver inputs will be processed. For instance, higher
spontaneous activity could subserve more linear
processing (i.e., reducing rectification in the processed
signal), a lower signal-to-noise ratio, and could also
have effects on the state of the synaptic efficacy of the
post-synaptic cell as regards its status as a depressing
or facilitating synapse.
One further point is important to consider in the
case that a group of excitatory inputs becomes
relatively more (or less) active, resulting in increased
firing in the target cell. One possible interpretation is
that the enhanced input that was once a modulator
now becomes a driver, implying a dynamic shifting in
the function of inputs between driver and modulator.
While this cannot be ruled out, it would require
more complex processing if the above idea of a
labeled line is valid, because this would also require
dynamic shifting in how targets of the cell in question
preform computations on these messages. It seems
more parsimonious to regard such changes in relative
strength of excitatory versus inhibitory inputs as a
means to control spontaneous activity, a purely
modulatory function.

First and higher order thalamic relays
One of the problems in understanding the functional
role of a thalamic relay is to identify the information
it relays to cortex, and essentially this boils down to
identifying the driver input. This is fairly straightforward for the primary visual, somatosensory, and
auditory relays. However, in this regard, much of
thalamus has, until recently, remained terra incognita.
As a road map exploring thalamus more generally,
one can start with the bulleted list above, identifying
which inputs to such relays as the pulvinar, medial
dorsal, or intralaminar nuclei are likely to be drivers.
Doing so leads to the conclusion that thalamic relays
can be divided into two groups — first and higher
order — depending on the origin of the driver input

120

Fig. 5. Schematic diagrams showing ﬁrst order and higher order relays. A: Distinction between ﬁrst order and higher order relays.
A ﬁrst order thalamic relay (left) represents the ﬁrst relay of peripheral or subcortical information of a particular type to a ﬁrst order or
primary cortical area. A higher order relay (right) relays information from layer 5 of one cortical area to another cortical area; this can
be between ﬁrst order and higher order cortical area (as shown) or between two higher order cortical areas (not shown). The diﬀerence
is the driver input, which is subcortical (left) for a ﬁrst order relay and from layer 5 of cortex (right) for a higher order relay. A feature
of driver inputs to thalamus is a thick axon with a large terminal innervating a proximal dendritic site, often in complex synaptic zones
known as glomeruli. Other distinguishing features are described in the text. Thus all thalamic relays receive an input from layer 6 of

121

(Guillery, 1995; Sherman and Guillery, 1996, 2001,
2002; Guillery and Sherman, 2002a). This is summarized in Fig. 5A.
First order relays receive their driver input from a
subcortical site and relay that information for the first
time to cortex. Examples of drivers and first order
relays are retinal input to the lateral geniculate
nucleus, medial lemniscal input to the ventral posterior nucleus, inferior collicular input to the ventral
portion of the medial geniculate nucleus, and cerebellar input to the ventral anterior and lateral nuclei.
Higher order relays, in contrast, receive their driver
input from layer 5 of a cortical area and relay this
input to another cortical area. Examples of higher
order relays are most or all of pulvinar and of the
medial dorsal nucleus. Overall, there appears to be
considerably more thalamus devoted to higher order
than to first order relays (Sherman and Guillery,
2001).
An implication that immediately springs from the
appreciation of higher order thalamic relays is
illustrated in Fig. 5B. That is, these relays serve as a
critical link in a corticothalamocortical route for
information transfer. Thus a great deal of corticocortical communication involves these routes with higher
order thalamic relays.
An important challenge to this concept derives
from a consideration of neuron numbers. Van Essen
(2005) points out that numbers of neurons in pulvinar
are orders of magnitude fewer than those in any
cortical area, and that even for area V1 outputs to
other cortical areas, this poses a severe bottleneck on
information transfer. Nonetheless, given that a very
small percentage of V1 neurons are represented by the
layer 5 efferents that could provide the afferent link in
the corticothalamocortical pathway (Callaway and
Wiser, 1996), these numbers do not seem to pose a
limitation on the role of the pulvinar as a central relay
structure for these layer 5 inputs. Thus a related
question raised is whether or not the limited number

of layer 5 efferents is sufficient to project all of the
information processed by a cortical area, such as V1.
The answer is the nature of this information that is
passed on is not known, and the ignorance here is
such that the possibility that the small subset of layer
5 efferent cells is up to the task cannot be ruled out.
Nonetheless, it is also possible that the full range of
information processed in a cortical region requires an
additional route, presumably involving direct corticocortical pathways.
What, then, of these direct corticocortical projections, of which there are many? The answer to this
question may depend on the nature of these connections. For instance, if these, like thalamic inputs, can
be divided into drivers and modulators, then the
answer will depend on the subset of these direct
pathways that are drivers, and thus it becomes
important to characterize these connections functionally; to date virtually all have been defined strictly on
light microscopic connectional bases with emphasis
on their laminar origin and termination, and these
criteria are insufficient to characterize their function.
One should not be dazzled by sheer numbers here.
That is, the fact that there are many more direct
corticocortical inputs to a cortical area than there are
thalamocortical does not mean that these are functionally dominant. Recall that only 7% of inputs to
lateral geniculate relay cells are retinal while nearly a
third derive from the brainstem parabrachial region:
if this logic of numbers dictating function were
applied to the lateral geniculate nucleus, one would
be misled to the conclusion that this nucleus relays
parabrachial information, with the small retinal input
playing some minor, ethereal role.
Even if these direct corticocortical connections
contain many drivers and thus subserve corticocortical communication, there is at least one important
difference between this information route and that
involving higher order thalamic relays. This has
to do with the nature of driver afferents to thalamus.

cortex, which is mostly feedback, but higher order relays in addition receive a layer 5 input from cortex, which is feedforward. B: Role
of higher order thalamic relays in corticocortical communication. The suggested route of much of this communication involves a
projection from layer 5 of cortex to a higher order thalamic relay to another cortical area. In question is the function, driver or
modulator, of the direct corticocortical projections. Note in both A and B that the driver inputs, both subcortical and from layer 5, are
typically from branching axons, the signiﬁcance of which is elaborated in the text. (FO, ﬁrst order; HO, higher order; LGN, lateral
geniculate nucleus; MGNmagno, magnocellular portion of the medial geniculate nucleus; MGNv, ventral portion of the medial
geniculate nucleus; POm, posterior medial nucleus; Pul, pulvinar; TRN, thalamic reticular nucleus; VP, ventral posterior nucleus.)

122

For both first order and higher order relays
(Figs. 5A, B), most and perhaps all of these afferents
are axons that branch, with one branch innervating
thalamus and other(s) innervating apparent motor
subcortical centers (Guillery and Sherman, 2002b;
Guillery, 2003, 2005). As examples, most or all retinal
axons innervating the lateral geniculate nucleus
branch to innervate the midbrain as well, and these
midbrain structures are involved in various oculomotor tasks; likewise, most or all layer 5 axons innervating pulvinar branch to innervate other subcortical
structures, such as the pons and midbrain, that are
involved in motor control. This pattern has led to the
notion that the actual information being relayed to
cortex via both first order and higher order relays are
actually copies of motor commands. This notion and
its implications for cognitive processing have been
explored elsewhere (Guillery and Sherman, 2002b;
Guillery, 2003) and are more fully developed by
Guillery in Chapter 17. The main issue here, however,
is that any messages sent by way of direct corticocortical drivers are messages that stay within cortex,
whereas those sent by way of higher order thalamic
relays are shared with various subcortical structures,
implying that the very nature of the messages is likely
to be quite different.
There is another point made by Fig. 5B, which is
that most or all information reaching a cortical area,
whether originating in the periphery or another
cortical area, benefits from a thalamic relay. That is,
just as retinal information passes through thalamus
and does not directly innervate cortex, so does most
or all information directed from one cortical area to
another. The same benefits conferred to the relay of
retinal information through the lateral geniculate
nucleus — whatever they may be — apply as well to
corticocortical information flow when a higher order
thalamic relay is involved. As just one example,
consider burst and tonic firing of thalamic relay
cells. It has been suggested that the burst mode may
be present in the lateral geniculate nucleus when
attention is either reduced during drowsiness or
directed elsewhere, so that the relay cells are generally
inactive and presumably hyperpolarized. This results
in a burst response to a novel visual stimulus, a
response that is better detected and more strongly
activates cortex, producing a sort of ‘‘wake up call’’;
tonic mode is then initiated to ensure a more faithful

relay of information about the new stimulus. This
same process may occur for inputs carried by cortical
layer 5 axons to higher order thalamic relays. Thus if
such a layer 5 cell has been inactive for a time due to
drowsiness or other factors related to inattention,
the target thalamic relay cells may be in burst mode,
and now new activity from the layer 5 cell will activate
a burst in the thalamic relay cell that ‘‘wakes up’’ the
transthalamic cortical target area; tonic firing then
commences for continued information processing
along this route. Firing mode in the higher order
thalamic relays would be controlled as in the first
order relays like the lateral geniculate nucleus, with
modulatory brainstem and layer 6 cortical inputs and
their influence on the thalamic reticular nucleus
providing this control.

Conclusions
It should now be clear that the thalamus actually
plays a central and dynamic role in cortical functioning. Thalamus controls the flow of virtually all information to cortex, and does so in interesting ways
that we are just beginning to resolve; it not only relays
peripheral information to cortex in the first place but
also plays a continuing role in further corticocortical
processing; and the nature of the information relayed
to cortex in many and perhaps all cases seems to be a
copy of motor commands, allowing the target cortical
areas to be updated about these commands. The
complex cell and circuit properties of thalamus belie
any sort of trivial, machine-like relay that was
thought to be its only function until recently. One
dynamic relay function that we are just beginning to
understand is the control of response mode — burst
or tonic — although we are clearly still far from a
complete understanding of its control and behavioral
significance. Yet this is probably just the tip of the
iceberg: there are undoubtedly many more dynamic
relay functions that remain to be identified.
The other two features of thalamic functioning —
a continued role in corticocortical communication
and the information relayed being motor commands
— are summarized schematically in Fig. 6. This places
the ideas presented here (Fig. 6B) in bold relief by
comparing them to the conventional view of thalamic functioning (Fig. 6A). In the conventional view

123

Fig. 6. Comparison of conventional view (A) with the alternative view proposed here (B). The role of the direct corticocortical
connections in B (dashed lines) is questioned (see text for details). (FO, ﬁrst order; HO, higher order.)

(Felleman and Van Essen, 1991; van Essen et al.,
1992; Purves et al., 1997; Kandel et al., 2000), peripheral information, which is largely sensory, is relayed through appropriate thalamic relays to primary

sensory cortex. This information then stays entirely
within cortex, passing through sensorimotor and
motor hierarchical levels, and finally a motor command is computed to be transmitted to subcortical

124

motor centers. All corticocortical communication is
handled by direct connections wholly within cortex.
One problem with this view is that it provides no role
for the majority of thalamic relays, which we have
designated as higher order.
The view presented here (Alternative View,
Fig. 6B) clearly places the higher order relays in the
thick of things by having them serve as essential links
in a corticothalamocortical route for cortical processing. This view also shows that most or all of the
information actually passed on to thalamus for relay,
both through first order and higher order relays, is
carried by branching axons that also innervate
motor centers. In this view, cortical processing can
be thought of as a continuing elaboration and fine
tuning of these motor commands. One final point
stands out: if the scheme shown in Fig. 6B has any
truth to it, it is obvious that one can no longer
think about cortical functioning without considering
thalamus.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by funding from the
National Eye Institute of the National Institutes of
Health. I would like to thank R.W.Guillery for many
helpful discussions and comments on this manuscript.

References
Abbott, L.F. (2005) Drivers and modulators from push-pull
and balanced synaptic input. Prog. Brain Res., this volume.
Ahmed, B., Anderson, J.C., Douglas, R.J., Martin, K.A.C. and
Nelson, J.C. (1994) Polyneuronal innervation of spiny
stellate neurons in cat visual cortex. J. Comp. Neurol., 341:
39–49.
Ahmed, B., Anderson, J.C., Martin, K.A.C. and Nelson, J.C.
(1997) Map of the synapses onto layer 4 basket cells of
the primary visual cortex of the cat. J. Comp. Neurol., 380:
230–242.
Alonso, J.M., Usrey, W.M. and Reid, R.C. (2001) Rules of
connectivity between geniculate cells and simple cells in cat
primary visual cortex. J. Neurosci., 21: 4002–4015.
Beierlein, M. and Connors, B.W. (2002) Short-term dynamics
of thalamocortical and intracortical synapses onto layer 6
neurons in neocortex. J. Neurophysiol., 88: 1924–1932.
Britten, K.H., Shadlen, M.N., Newsome, W.T. and Movshon,
J.A. (1993) Responses of neurons in macaque MT to

stochastic motion signals. Visual Neuroscience, 10:
1157–1169.
Callaway, E.M. and Wiser, A.K. (1996) Contributions of
individual layer 2–5 spiny neurons to local circuits in
macaque primary visual cortex. Visual Neurosci, 13:
907–922.
Castro-Alamancos, M.A. and Oldford, E. (2002) Cortical
sensory suppression during arousal is due to the activitydependent depression of thalamocortical synapses. Journal
of Physiology, 541: 319–331.
Chance, F.S., Abbott, L.F. and Reyes, A. (2002) Gain
modulation from background synaptic input. Neuron, 35:
773–782.
Chung, S., Li, X. and Nelson, S.B. (2002) Short-term
depression at thalamocortical synapses contributes to rapid
adaptation of cortical sensory responses in vivo. Neuron, 34:
437–446.
Cleland, B.G., Dubin, M.W. and Levick, W.R. (1971)
Sustained and transient neurones in the cat’s retina and
lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Physiol. (Lond.), 217: 473–496.
Conn, P.J. (2003) Physiological roles and therapeutic potential
of metabotropic glutamate receptors. Prog. Neurobiol., 1003:
12–21.
Conn, P.J. and Pin, J.P. (1997) Pharmacology and functions
of metabotropic glutamate receptors. Annual Review of
Pharmacology & Toxicology, 37: 205–237.
Dowling, J.E. (1970) Organization of vertebrate retinas.
Investigative Ophthalmology, 9: 655–680.
Dowling, J.E. (1987) The Retina: An Approachable Part of
the Brain. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Fanselow, E.E. and Nicolelis, M.A. (1999) Behavioral modulation of tactile responses in the rat somatosensory system.
Journal of Neuroscience, 19: 7603–7616.
Felleman, D.J. and Van Essen, D.C. (1991) Distributed
hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex.
Cerebral Cortex, 1: 1–47.
Ferster, D. (2004) Assembly of receptive ﬁelds in primary
visual cortex. In: Chalupa, L.M. and Werner, J.S. (Eds.),
The Visual Neurosciences. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.,
pp. 695–703.
Ferster, D., Chung, S. and Wheat, H. (1996) Orientation
selectivity of thalamic input to simple cells of cat visual
cortex. Nature, 380: 249–252.
Ferster, D. and Miller, K.D. (2000) Neural mechanisms of
orientation selectivity in the visual cortex. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 23: 441–471.
Grunewald, A., Bradley, D.C. and Andersen, R.A. (2002)
Neural correlates of structure-from-motion perception in
macaque V1 and MT. Journal of Neuroscience, 22:
6195–6207.
Guido, W., Lu, S.-M., Vaughan, J.W., Godwin, D.W. and
Sherman, S.M. (1995) Receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) analysis of neurons in the cat’s lateral geniculate

125
nucleus during tonic and burst response mode. Visual
Neuroscience, 12: 723–741.
Guido, W. and Weyand, T. (1995) Burst responses in thalamic relay cells of the awake behaving cat. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 74: 1782–1786.
Guillery, R.W. (1995) Anatomical evidence concerning the role
of the thalamus in corticocortical communication: A brief
review. Journal of Anatomy, 187: 583–592.
Guillery, R.W. (2003) Branching thalamic aﬀerents link action
and perception. J. Neurophysiol., 90: 539–548.
Guillery, R. W. (2005) Anatomical pathways that link action to
perception. Progress in Brain Research, this volume.
Guillery, R.W. and Sherman, S.M. (2002a) Thalamic relay
functions and their role in corticocortical communication:
Generalizations from the visual system. Neuron, 33: 1–20.
Guillery, R.W. and Sherman, S.M. (2002b) The thalamus as
a monitor of motor outputs. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London.B: Biological Sciences, 357:
1809–1821.
Gutierrez, C., Cox, C.L., Rinzel, J. and Sherman, S.M. (2001)
Dynamics of low-threshold spike activation in relay neurons
of the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. Journal of Neuroscience,
21: 1022–1032.
Hubel, D.H. and Wiesel, T.N. (1961) Integrative action in
the cat’s lateral geniculate body. Journal of Physiology
(London), 155: 385–398.
Hubel, D.H. and Wiesel, T.N. (1962) Receptive ﬁelds,
binocular interaction and functional architecture in the
cat’s visual cortex. J. Physiol., 160: 106–154.
Hubel, D.H. and Wiesel, T.N. (1977) Functional architecture
of macaque monkey visual cortex. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London [Biology], 198: 1–59.
Huettner, J.E. (2003) Kainate receptors and synaptic transmission. Progress in Neurobiology, 70: 387–407.
Jahnsen, H. and Llinaa´s, R. (1984a) Electrophysiological
properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurones: an in vitro study.
Journal of Physiology (London), 349: 205–226.
Jahnsen, H. and Llinaa´s, R. (1984b) Ionic basis for the
electroresponsiveness and oscillatory properties of guineapig thalamic neurones in vitro. Journal of Physiology
(London), 349: 227–247.
Kandel, E.R., Schwartz, J.H. and Jessell, T.M. (2000)
Principles of Neural Science. McGraw Hill, New York.
Kara, P., Pezaris, J.S., Yurgenson, S. and Reid, R.C. (2002)
The spatial receptive ﬁeld of thalamic inputs to single cortical
simple cells revealed by the interaction of visual and electrical stimulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 99: 16261–16266.
Kohn, A. and Movshon, J.A. (2003) Neuronal adaptation to
visual motion in area MT of the macaque. Neuron, 39:
681–691.
Lenz, F.A., Garonzik, I.M., Zirh, T.A. and Dougherty, P.M.
(1998) Neuronal activity in the region of the thalamic
principal sensory nucleus (ventralis caudalis) in patients

with pain following amputations. Neuroscience, 86:
1065–1081.
Lu, S.-M., Guido, W. and Sherman, S.M. (1992) Eﬀects of
membrane voltage on receptive ﬁeld properties of lateral
geniculate neurons in the cat: contributions of the low
threshold Ca++ conductance. Journal of Neurophysiology,
68: 2185–2198.
Massaux, A., Dutrieux, G., Cotillon-Williams, N., Manunta,
Y. and Edeline, J.M. (2004) Auditory thalamus bursts in
anesthetized and non-anesthetized states: contribution to
functional properties. J. Neurophysiol., 91: 2117–2134.
Mayer, M.L. and Westbrook, G.L. (1987) The physiology of
excitatory amino acids in the vertebrate central nervous
system. Progress in Neurobiology, 28: 197–276.
McCormick, D.A. and Bal, T. (1997) Sleep and arousal: Thalamocortical mechanisms. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 20:
185–215.
McCormick, D.A. and Huguenard, J.R. (1992) A model of
the electrophysiological properties of thalamocortical relay
neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 68: 1384–1400.
Mott, D.D. and Lewis, D.V. (1994) The pharmacology and
function of central GABAB receptors. International Review
of Neurobiology, 36: 97–223.
Nakanishi, S., Nakajima, Y., Masu, M., Ueda, Y., Nakahara,
K., Watanabe, D., Yamaguchi, S., Kawabata, S. and Okada,
M. (1998) Glutamate receptors: brain function and signal
transduction. Brain Research Reviews, 26: 230–235.
Nicolelis, M.A., Baccala, L.A., Lin, R.C. and Chapin, J.K.
(1995) Sensorimotor encoding by synchronous neural
ensemble activity at multiple levels of the somatosensory
system. Science, 268: 1353–1358.
Nicolelis, M.A.L. (2002) Depression at thalamocortical
synapses: The key for cortical neuronal adaptation?
Neuron, 34: 331–332.
Nicoll, R.A., Malenka, R.C. and Kauer, J.A. (1990) Functional
comparison of neurotransmitter receptor subtypes in mammalian central nervous system. Physiological Reviews, 70:
513–565.
O’Keefe, L.P. and Movshon, J.A. (1998) Processing of ﬁrstand second-order motion signals by neurons in area MT of
the macaque monkey. Visual Neuroscience, 15: 305–317.
Osborne, L.C., Bialek, W. and Lisberger, S.G. (2004) Time
course of information about motion direction in visual area
MT of macaque monkeys. Journal of Neuroscience, 24:
3210–3222.
Ozawa, S., Kamiya, H. and Tsuzuki, K. (1998) Glutamate
receptors in the mammalian central nervous system. Progress
in Neurobiology, 54: 581–618.
Pin, J.P. and Bockaert, J. (1995) Get receptive to metabotropic
glutamate receptors. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 5:
342–349.
Pin, J.P. and Duvoisin, R. (1995) The metabotropic glutamate
receptors: structure and functions. Neuropharmacology, 34:
1–26.

126
Purves, D., Augustine, G.J., Fitzpatrick, D., Katz, L.C.,
Lamantia, A.-S. and McNamara, J.O. (1997) Neuroscience.
Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Qian, A. and Johnson, J.W. (2002) Channel gating of NMDA
receptors. Physiol. Behav., 77: 577–582.
Radhakrishnan, V., Tsoukatos, J., Davis, K.D., Tasker, R.R.,
Lozano, A.M. and Dostrovsky, J.O. (1999) A comparison of
the burst activity of lateral thalamic neurons in chronic pain
and non-pain patients. Pain, 80: 567–575.
Ramcharan, E.J., Gnadt, J.W. and Sherman, S.M. (2000) Burst
and tonic ﬁring in thalamic cells of unanesthetized, behaving
monkeys. Visual Neuroscience, 17: 55–62.
Recasens, M. and Vignes, M. (1995) Excitatory amino acid
metabotropic receptor subtypes and calcium regulation.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 757: 418–429.
Sherman, S.M. (1985) Functional organization of the W-,X-,
and Y-cell pathways in the cat: a review and hypothesis. In:
Sprague, J.M. and Epstein, A.N. (Eds.), Progress in
Psychobiology and Physiological Psychology. Vol. 11,
Academic Press, Orlando, pp. 233–314.
Sherman, S.M. (1996) Dual response modes in lateral
geniculate neurons: mechanisms and functions. Visual
Neuroscience, 13: 205–213.
Sherman, S.M. (2001) Tonic and burst ﬁring: dual modes of
thalamocortical relay. Trends in Neurosciences, 24: 122–126.
Sherman, S.M. and Guillery, R.W. (1996) The functional
organization of thalamocortical relays. Journal of Neurophysiology, 76: 1367–1395.
Sherman, S.M. and Guillery, R.W. (1998) On the actions that
one nerve cell can have on another: Distinguishing ‘‘drivers’’
from ‘‘modulators’’. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA, 95: 7121–7126.
Sherman, S.M. and Guillery, R.W. (2001) Exploring the
Thalamus. Academic Press, San Diego.
Sherman, S.M. and Guillery, R.W. (2002) The role of thalamus in the ﬂow of information to cortex. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London.B: Biological
Sciences, 357: 1695–1708.
Sherman, S.M. and Guillery, R.W. (2004) Thalamus. In:
Shepherd, G.M. (Ed.), Synaptic Organization of the Brain.
Oxford University Press., pp. 311–359.
Smith, G. D., Cox, C. L., Sherman, S. M., & Rinzel, J. (1998)
Fourier analysis of sinusoidally driven thalamocortical relay
neurons from cat thalamic slice and a minimal integrate-andﬁre-or-burst model. Society for Neuroscience, 24, 139.
Steriade, M. and Llinaa´s, R. (1988) The functional states
of the thalamus and the associated neuronal interplay.
Physiological Reviews, 68: 649–742.
Steriade, M., McCormick, D.A. and Sejnowski, T.J. (1993)
Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused
brain. Science, 262: 679–685.

Stratford, K.J., Tarczy-Hornoch, K., Martin, K.A.C.,
Bannister, N.J. and Jack, J.J.B. (1996) Excitatory synaptic
inputs to spiny stellate cells in cat visual cortex. Nature, 382:
258–261.
Swadlow, H. A. Bezdudnaya T, & Gusev, A. G. (2005). Spike
timing and synaptic dynamics at the awake thalamocortical
synapse. Progress in Brain Research, this volume.
Swadlow, H.A. and Gusev, A.G. (2001) The impact of
‘‘bursting’’ thalamic impulses at a neocortical synapse.
Nature Neuroscience, 4: 402–408.
Swadlow, H.A., Gusev, A.G. and Bezdudnaya, T. (2002)
Activation of a cortical column by a thalamocortical impulse.
Journal of Neuroscience, 22: 7766–7773.
Tsumoto, T., Creutzfeldt, O.D. and Legendy, C.R. (1978)
Functional organization of the cortifugal system from visual
cortex to lateral geniculate nucleus in the cat. Experimental
Brain Research, 32: 345–364.
Usrey, W.M., Alonso, J.M. and Reid, R.C. (2000) Synaptic
interactions between thalamic inputs to simple cells in cat
visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 20: 5461–5467.
Usrey, W.M., Reppas, J.B. and Reid, R.C. (1999) Speciﬁcity
and strength of retinogeniculate connections. J. Neurophysiol., 82: 3527–3540.
Van Essen, D. C. (2005) [to be determined]. Progress in Brain
Research, this volume.
van Essen, D.C. (1979) Visual areas of the mammalian cerebral
cortex. Annual Reviews in Neuroscience, 2: 227–263.
van Essen, D.C. (1985) Functional organization of primate
visual cortex. In: Peters, A. and Jones, E.G. (Eds.), Cerebral
Cortex. Vol. 3, Plenum., pp. 259–329.
van Essen, D.C., Anderson, C.H. and Felleman, D.J. (1992)
Information processing in the primate visual system: an
integrated systems perspective. Science, 255: 419–423.
van Essen, D.C. and Maunsell, J.H.R. (1983) Hierarchical
organization and functional streams in the visual cortex.
Trends in Neurosciences, 6: 370–375.
van Horn, S.C., Eris° ir, A. and Sherman, S.M. (2000) The
relative distribution of synapses in the A-laminae of the
lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 416: 509–520.
Weyand, T.G., Boudreaux, M. and Guido, W. (2001) Burst
and tonic response modes in thalamic neurons during
sleep and wakefulness. Journal of Neurophysiology, 85:
1107–1118.
Zhan, X.J., Cox, C.L., Rinzel, J. and Sherman, S.M. (1999)
Current clamp and modeling studies of low threshold
calcium spikes in cells of the cat’s lateral geniculate nucleus.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 81: 2360–2373.
Zirh, T.A., Lenz, F.A., Reich, S.G. and Dougherty, P.M.
(1998) Patterns of bursting occurring in thalamic cells during
parkinsonian tremor. Neuroscience, 83: 107–121.

