Review

TRENDS in Neurosciences Vol.28 No.6 June 2005

INMED/TINS special issue

Excitatory effects of GABA in
established brain networks
Alain Marty and Isabel Llano
Laboratoire de Physiologie Ce´re´brale, Universite´ Paris 5/CNRS, 45 Rue des Saints Pe`res, 75006 Paris, France

Although GABA remains the predominant inhibitory
neurotransmitter of the brain, there are numerous
recent examples of excitatory actions of GABA. These
actions can be classified in two broad categories: phasic
excitatory effects, as follow single activation of GABAergic afferents, and sustained excitatory effects, as
follow prolonged activation of GABAA receptors. Evidence reviewed here indicates that, contrary to common
belief, these effects are not restricted to embryonic or
neonatal preparations.

Introduction
Activation of GABAA receptors leads to opening of
K
channels that are permeable to HCOK
3 and Cl . Under
physiological conditions, the corresponding currents have
a reversal potential (EGABA) close to the neuronal resting
potential. In recent years, it has become increasingly clear
that the resulting effects on the postsynaptic cell can be
either inhibitory or excitatory. In particular, it has been
realized that EGABA is developmentally regulated such
that activation of GABAA receptors is mostly excitatory in
neonatal brain preparations, but becomes inhibitory later
in development [1–3]. The excitatory action of GABA early
in life is presumably important for neuronal development
and network formation.
Superimposed on the evolution of GABA action during
development, there appear to be important differences in the
effects of this neurotransmitter depending on experimental
conditions and tissue specificity. Thus, it has been recognized for some time that in dorsal root ganglion neurons, ClK
homeostasis differs from that in many brain neurons, so that
in these cells GABAA receptor activation leads to depolarization [1]. In the past few years, GABAA-receptor-induced
excitation has also been discovered in mature brain
preparations – such findings are the subject of this review.
Here, ‘mature’ means that networks are already established
and fulfill their normal function. However, it is important to
note that many studies, particularly of brain slices, have
actually been performed using juvenile preparations.
Phasic excitatory effects of GABAA receptor activation in
mature GABAergic synapses
A recent study of cortical pyramidal cells from three-tofour-week-old rats showed that activation of dendritic
Corresponding author: Marty, A. (alain.marty@univ-paris5.fr).
Available online 22 April 2005

GABAergic synapses leads to cell depolarization [4]. If
activation of such a GABAergic afferent is combined
within a certain time window (w5–10 ms) with a depolarization mimicking subthreshold glutamate-mediated excitation, action potentials are emitted (Figure 1a,i), showing
that the GABAergic afferent enhances the cell excitability.
Interestingly however, a similar depolarization elicited by
a GABAergic afferent in the somatic domain has the
opposite effect on cell excitability – that is, it inhibits firing
(Figure 1a,ii). Depolarization occurs in this system simply
because the resting potential (wK85 mV) is more negative than EGABA (wK70 mV).
Thus, even relatively negative EGABA values are
compatible with excitatory effects of GABAergic afferents.
In the cortex and amygdala, interneurons have a more
depolarized EGABA value than pyramidal cells [5] so that,
in interneurons, strongly excitatory effects of stimulation
of GABAergic afferents can be expected. The same pattern
is found in the cerebellum: whereas Purkinje cells of twoto-four-week-old rats have an EGABA value near K85 mV,
that of interneurons (stellate and basket cells of the
molecular layer) is near K58 mV [6]. Consequently,
activation of presynaptic GABAergic afferents leads in
some interneurons to a postsynaptic spike or to a train of
spikes (Figure 1b,i). In other interneurons, however,
activation of presynaptic GABAergic afferents has the
opposite effect: hyperpolarization and a strong reduction
of the spike frequency (Figure 1b,ii). Analysis of many
such experiments reveals that both EGABA and the cell
resting potential have significant cell-to-cell differences,
and that the nature of the synaptic response is determined
by the sign of the difference between the two parameters.
This system conforms to the simple view that depolarizing
responses are excitatory, and hyperpolarizing responses
are inhibitory (although it is important to note that this
scheme is far from universal; Box 1). The interneuron
network of the cerebellar molecular layer thus possesses
both excitatory and inhibitory GABAergic synapses
simultaneously, and is an interesting preparation for
studying conditions that control the switch from excitatory to inhibitory.
In chick nucleus magnocellularis cells, which are
located in the cochlear nucleus and receive GABAergic
projections from the superior olivary nucleus, EGABA is
maintained at a very depolarized level (K25 mV) up to ten
days after hatching, well after hearing is established [7].
In this preparation, even though GABA-mediated

www.sciencedirect.com 0166-2236/$ - see front matter Q 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2005.04.003

Review

TRENDS in Neurosciences Vol.28 No.6 June 2005

(a)
(i)

285

(b)
(i)

100 ms
20 mV

Dendritic IPSP

IPSP

aEPSP (subthreshold)

(ii)

Pair

5 mV
20 mV
10 ms

Vm = –74 mV
f = 0.9 Hz

Stim.

(ii)

Somatic IPSP

IPSP

aEPSP (suprathreshold)

Pair

Vm = –49 mV
f = 15 Hz

Stim.

Figure 1. Excitatory versus inhibitory GABAergic synapses in mature brain preparations. (a) Cortical slice. (i) Whereas separate activation of dendritic synapses by an
inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) and somatic current injection (aEPSP) both lead to subthreshold depolarization, combination of the two produces an action potential.
(ii) By contrast, activation of somatic synapses by an IPSP converts a depolarizing somatic current injection from suprathreshold to subthreshold. Reproduced, with
permission, from Ref. [4]. (b) Cerebellar slice. (i) Stimulation (stim.) of GABAergic synapses leads to a burst of action potentials. (ii) In another cell, a similar stimulation
inhibits firing. The cell in (i) had a low resting potential (VmZK74 mV) and resting firing frequency (fZ0.9 Hz), whereas that in (ii) had a higher resting potential (VmZK49 mV) and
resting firing frequency (fZ15 Hz). (a) and (b) respectively represent recordings from pyramidal cells and basket cells; they were obtained with gramicidin perforated-patch
recording, to preserve intracellular anion homeostasis. Reproduced, with permission, from Ref. [6] q (2003) the Society for Neuroscience.

synaptic potentials are depolarizing, they are not suprathreshold for single stimuli. When a train is given, just one
spike is generated near the beginning of the train (usually
in response to the second stimulation). In this sense, the
GABAergic input can be considered excitatory. However,
GABA-mediated trains inhibit spikes induced by simultaneous glutamate inputs, and from this point of view they
are inhibitory [7].
Activity-driven changes in the sign of GABAergic
synapses
The aforementioned examples illustrate the fact that
apparently modest differences in EGABA can have dramatic functional consequences. This raises the question of
whether neuronal activity can significantly alter this
parameter.
In mature hippocampal pyramidal cells, the effects of
single stimulations of GABAergic inputs are inhibitory.
However, if a high-frequency train is delivered, GABAergic synapses become depolarizing (after w1 s) and
enhance firing. This is accompanied by accumulation of

ClK in neurons, and increased concentration of KC in
interstitial fluid [8]. New evidence using intracellular ClK
recording (as measured using the fluorescent probe
6-methoxy-N-ethylquinolium iodide, MEQ) confirms that
the intracellular ClK concentration ([ClK]i) rises in CA1
pyramidal cells during such trains, and suggests a close
link between ClK accumulation and enhanced excitability
[9]. In the CA3 region, the activity-driven EGABA shift is
much faster and larger in interneurons than in pyramidal
cells [10]. The contrast between the two neuron types
might be due to differences in surface-to-volume ratio, in
intracellular carbonic anhydrase activity or in plasma
membrane ClK transporters. In any case, it is interesting
that in the hippocampus, high-frequency stimulation
induces different EGABA changes in interneurons and
principal cells; these are reminiscent of the different
EGABA values observed under resting conditions in the
corresponding neuronal classes of the cortex and
cerebellum.
Although the [ClK]i increase measured by Isomura
et al. [9] was transient, another study indicates that,

Box 1. Defining an excitatory GABA action
There is sometimes confusion concerning the meaning of the words
‘excitatory GABA action’. Although a high [ClK]i value makes it easier to
observe such an action, it has been pointed out many times that a
depolarizing effect of GABA should not be taken as synonym for an
excitatory effect. Thus, in the spinal cord GABA depolarizes primary
afferent nerve terminals, yet inhibits transmission [1]. Likewise, in
peptidergic terminals, GABA-induced depolarization leads to NaC
channel inactivation and reduces presynaptic GABA release [30];
Figure 1b illustrates another example of an inhibitory depolarizing
response. In a frequently found pattern, a depolarizing GABA-mediated
potential leads to a sequence of inhibition and excitation. Inhibition lasts
for the duration of the GABA-mediated conductance, and is due to the
fact that this conductance tends to clamp the cell potential near the
equilibrium potential for ClK, which is typically below the spike firing
threshold (‘shunting inhibition’; e.g. see Ref. [31]).
www.sciencedirect.com

It is also important to distinguish between the effects of brief GABA
application, as occurs during single synaptic transmission, and the
effects of longer application of GABAA receptor agonists. This review
first focuses on single synaptic effects. They are considered excitatory
if a single activation of a GABA afferent facilitates (Figure 1a,i) or elicits
(Figure 1b,ii) spiking of the postsynaptic cell. Effects of longer GABAA
receptor stimulation, as occurs during application of exogenous
agonists, are considered later in this review. Even though sustained
GABAA receptor activation often stops action potential firing, owing to
shunting inhibition, it can lead to elevation of [Ca2C]i (Figure 3). This
elevation might serve as a positive signal for many cellular processes,
but it might also trigger phenomena that can hardly be considered
excitatory, including inhibition of spike firing following activation of
Ca2C-dependent KC channels. Thus, postsynaptic elevation of [Ca2C]i
cannot be taken as a proof for excitatory GABA action.

Review

TRENDS in Neurosciences Vol.28 No.6 June 2005

under certain circumstances, the concentration change
can be made virtually permanent (on the timescale of a
standard electrophysiological recording, w30 min). In
hippocampal cultures and slices, it was recently shown
that combining stimulation of GABAergic afferents with
postsynaptic spiking results in a long-term change in
[ClK]i, provided that the two stimuli are applied repetitively within a time window of w20 ms [11] (Figure 2).
Pharmacological evidence indicates that the long-term
EGABA increase requires a postsynaptic increase in
intracellular Ca2C concentration ([Ca2C]i) following activation of L-type Ca2C channels. The change in EGABA
amounts to w4 mV following a 30-s-long train of paired
stimulations at 5 Hz; this would be sufficient to switch the
sign of a synapse from inhibitory to excitatory. Woodin
et al. suggest that altered activity of ClK transporters,
possibly the KC–ClK cotransporter KCC2, is responsible
for the effect. Consistent with this possibility, sustained
interictal-like activity in hippocampal CA1 cells downregulates KCC2 mRNA and protein expression [12]. Thus,
the notion emerges that neuronal activity can change
EGABA in two ways. First, changes in [ClK]i result from
sustained or repetitive activation of GABAA receptors;
these changes are transient and relax with a time
constant of w1 min [13]. Second, in certain circumstances
(probably involving an increase in [Ca2C]i in addition to
that of [ClK]i), the properties of the ClK transporters are
modified, so that the set-point of the system is altered,
resulting in long-term changes in EGABA.
The activity-dependent rise of [ClK]i in the hippocampus is thought to be due to the mixed permeability of
GABAA-receptor-gated channels for ClK and HCOK
3 . Each
(a) (i)

Modifications in [ClK]i during the day–night cycle
Because GABAergic synapses of mature brain circuits
operate so close to their switch point, they can be used to
reverse the operation of a circuit. A few years ago, Wagner
et al. [17] showed that in the suprachiasmatic nucleus,
which largely drives the day–night cycle in mammals,
GABAergic inputs are excitatory during the day and
inhibitory during the night. They proposed that the signchange occurred because of a shift of EGABA. More recently,
it was shown that muscimol applications increase [Ca2C]i
in a larger proportion of suprachiasmatic nucleus cells
during the day than at night [18].
Increased [ClK]i in pathological conditions
As already discussed here, repetitive extracellular stimulation of the hippocampus at a high rate increases [ClK]i
and consequently renders GABAergic synapses excitatory.
(b) (i)

2

800
GPSC amplitude

presynaptic spike induces small entry of ClK and exit of
K
HCOK
3 ; if internal HCO3 concentration is renewed from
diffusing CO2 by intracellular carbonic anhydrase, the
system continues to increase [ClK]i [14]. Consistent with
this view, the enhanced cell firing induced by highfrequency stimulation was blocked by inhibiting intracellular carbonic anhydrase [15]. This effect appears late
in development [later than postnatal day (P)15 in rat] and
is due to the expression of a specific subtype of carbonic
anhydrase, called CAVII, in pyramidal cells [15]. Thus,
expression of this carbonic anhydrase provides a means to
obtain excitatory GABAA-receptor-triggered actions that
differ mechanistically from those obtained early in life by
direct membrane depolarization [16].

1
600

400
1

200
–10

2

0
10
Time (min)

20

GPSC amplitude (normalized)

286

200
0
–200
–400
–600
–90 –80 –70 –60 –50 –40 –30
Holding potential (mV)

1.5

2

1

1.0
0.5
1

0.0
–10

2

0
10
Time (min)

20

–75
–65
Holding potential (mV)

–55

(ii)
200
GPSC amplitude (pA)

GPSC amplitude (pA)

(ii)
400

2.0

150
100
50
0
–50

–100
–85

Figure 2. Long-term change in [ClK]i following concerted presynaptic and postsynaptic stimulation – paired recordings from hippocampal neurons in culture. (a) Pairing
presynaptic and postsynaptic stimulations (5 Hz for 30 s; stimulation at time 0 indicated by the black arrow) leads to long-lasting enhancement of GABA-mediated
postsynaptic current (GPSC) amplitudes (i). The peak amplitude of GPSCs reverses at a less-negative potential after the pairing protocol (circles and dotted line) than before
(diamonds and continuous line), indicating a rise in [ClK]i (ii). (b) If a time interval as short as 75 ms is inserted between presynaptic and postsynaptic stimulations, no effect is
seen. Inserts in (a,i) and (b,i) represent averaged traces before (1) and after (2) stimulations. Scale bars, 100 pA and 20 ms. Reproduced, with permission, from Ref. [11].
www.sciencedirect.com

Review

TRENDS in Neurosciences Vol.28 No.6 June 2005

Likewise, in some cells recorded from hippocampal slices
taken from patients suffering from epilepsy, [ClK]i is
abnormally elevated, and GABAergic synapses are excitatory [19]. This raises the possibility that elevated [ClK]i
could be not only the consequence but also the cause of
bursts of brain activity [20].
Another pathological situation in which high [ClK]i has
been documented is ischemia. [ClK]i increase is observed
after a few minutes of subjecting brain slices to ischemic
conditions, and GABAergic synapses are thought to then
become excitatory. This probably has important consequences for subsequent brain damage, because drugs
interfering with GABA transmission can significantly
reduce this damage [21].
Finally, it was recently shown that after prolonged
constriction of the sciatic nerve (a model of chronic pain),
[ClK]i is elevated in superficial dorsal horn cells, and that
applications of exogenous GABA increase [Ca2C]i [22].
Interestingly, expression of KCC2 appears inhibited in
dorsal horn neurons of the injured side compared with
those on the control side, indicating that repetitive painful
stimuli trans-synaptically increase [ClK]i through an
action on KCC2.
Progenitor neuronal cells
Following the realization that some progenitor cells divide
and differentiate into neurons in the adult brain, much
effort has been recently devoted to the characterization of
these progenitor cells, in particular in the subventricular
zone. Although these cells are found in adults, they
resemble neonatal neurons as far as ClK homeostasis is
concerned. Indeed, neuronal progenitor cells recorded in
brain slices from adult mice, like those recorded in
cultures from neonatal rats [23], express GABAA receptors
and display depolarizing responses to GABA application
[24]. Because these cells contain GABA, an autocrine
GABA signaling mechanism was suggested [24,25].
Furthermore, it was shown that, in the adult mouse,
application of GABA or bicuculline respectively reduces or
enhances the speed of migration of neuronal progenitor
cells [26]. It was suggested that astrocytes modify the
migration speed by controlling the GABA concentration
surrounding the neuronal progenitor cells, and that this
control involves an alteration of [Ca2C]i in the migrating
cells [26].
[Ca2C]i rise
A widely used criterion in studying excitatory GABA
action is an increase in postsynaptic [Ca2C]i. This effect
has not so far been described following a single synaptic
stimulus, and all studies seeking to increase postsynaptic
[Ca2C]i resort to prolonged activation of GABAA receptors.
In neonatal preparations, such applications are assumed
to increase [Ca2C]i because GABA agonists depolarize the
cells above the activation threshold of voltage-dependent
Ca2C channels; there is no reason to doubt this interpretation. However, several results indicate that, in more
mature preparations, more complicated pathways operate. Therefore, care should be taken not to assume that
postsynaptic [Ca2C]i elevation always reflects postsynaptic excitation (Box 1).
www.sciencedirect.com

287

Early reports of GABA-induced increases in [Ca2C]i
were obtained using cultures of neurons (up to several
weeks old) from cerebellum or hippocampus [27,28]. In the
first example, the Ca2C responses outlasted GABA
applications by minutes, long after the expected offset of
GABAA receptor activation [27]. By contrast, responses to
glutamate receptor agonists returned quickly upon washout of the agonist. In the second study, the increase in
[Ca2C]i elicited by a comparatively short (duration of
w1 s) agonist application recovered much more slowly
than the GABA-induced current after prolonged GABA
application, indicating that recovery from desensitization
utilizes distinct mechanisms for the two responses [28].
Based on these observations, Segal suggested that the
coupling between GABAA receptor activation and Ca2C
response involves slow kinetics, and is more complex than
depolarization-driven activation of Ca2C channels.
The exact nature of this link has long remained elusive.
Very recently however, the issue has been re-addressed in
interneurons of the cerebellar molecular layer, which
display a robust Ca2C response to muscimol applications
at up to P20 [29] (Figure 3a). In these cells, EGABA is on
average equal to the resting potential, so that a simple
depolarization-driven Ca2C entry would not have an
effect. The Ca2C response to muscimol was found to have
two phases: an early peak that is accompanied by mild cell
depolarization, and a sustained phase during which the
cell repolarizes to near the resting level. The early phase
appears to be linked to a gradual [ClK]i increase, driven by
the mixed permeability of GABA-activated channels for
2C
]i
ClK and HCOK
3 [14]. The associated increase in [Ca
rise is proposed to occur as part of a regulatory volume
decrease triggered by the increased osmotic tension
accompanying the [ClK]i rise (Figure 3b). The second
phase of the Ca2C response includes participation from
ryanodine-sensitive Ca2C stores and L-type Ca2C
channels.
Conclusion and perspectives
It is an unfortunate, but inescapable, outcome of the
recent work summarized here that the clean separation
between positive glutamate and negative GABA has to be
abandoned. For this reason, the traditional inhibitory
postsynaptic potential (IPSP) and inhibitory postsynaptic
current (IPSC) denominations are starting to be replaced
by GABA-mediated postsynaptic potential (GPSP) and
GABA-mediated postsynaptic current (GPSC) in some
publications [6,11]. Thus, it is not enough to determine the
pharmacology of a synaptic connection to establish its
physiological role, and much painstaking work lies ahead to
find out exactly what effect each individual GABAergic
synapse has on the postsynaptic cell. The same applies
presumably to glycinergic synapses, which have not been
discussed here because of lack of space. The work needed
appears formidable, because it involves in each case several
tests in different stimulation conditions, and the use of
various techniques, including gramicidin perforated-patch
and cell-attached recordings, which are particularly
demanding and prone to experimental artefacts.
Another important message of this review is that
GABAergic synapses operate close to the critical point

Review

288

(a)

TRENDS in Neurosciences Vol.28 No.6 June 2005

understood and further tested in several preparations. It
will be particularly important to explore the intracellular
pathways involved in this response, and also the functional consequences of the resulting [Ca2C]i increase.

Muscimol

∆F/Fo (%)

150

100

References

Control
Cadmium

50

0
0

5

10
Time (s)

15

(b)
100

200 mOsm

∆F/Fo (%)

80
60
40
20
0

0

5

10
Time (s)

15

Figure 3. Muscimol-induced and hypo-osmotically-induced increases in [Ca2C]i in
cerebellar basket cells. (a) Application of the GABAA-receptor-specific agonist
muscimol leads to a [Ca2C]i rise (measured as the relative increase in fluorescence,
or DF/Fo ratio, reported by the Ca2C-sensitive dye OG-1) in cerebellar basket cells.
This is not significantly inhibited by the Ca2C-channel blocker cadmium, indicating
that onset of the [Ca2C]i rise is not due to activation of voltage-dependent Ca2C
channels. (b) In another cell, application of a hypo-osmotic solution leads to a
[Ca2C]i rise. This indicates that osmotic stress induces Ca2C responses. During
prolonged muscimol application, such stress could be produced by intracellular
accumulation of ClK. The [Ca2C]i rise in (b) is transient; likewise, that in (a)
displayed a transient peak followed by a much lower plateau (not shown). The
difference in timescale between the osmotically-driven signal and that induced by
muscimol can be explained by the fact that in the latter case, muscimol must induce
an increase in [ClK]i before the resulting osmotic stress can elevate [Ca2C]i.
Reproduced, with permission, from Ref. [27].

where the sign of the effects switches over. In fact, a given
synapse can display inhibitory effects with one protocol
and excitatory effects with another. Interestingly, relatively minor [ClK]i alterations in the postsynaptic cell can
operate the sign switch; such alterations might be brought
about either by physiologically relevant parameters
(e.g. status of the day–night cycle) or by pathological
conditions. Thus, GABAergic synapses appear much more
versatile than previously thought. An important challenge
for future research will be to understand better the
cellular mechanisms and functional roles of these fascinating sign changes.
Finally, an unexpected outcome of recent research in
this area has been the finding that GABA-induced [Ca2C]i
rises are not necessarily a consequence of depolarizationtriggered action potential firing. The cellular mechanism
that is suggested in cerebellar interneurons – osmoticallydriven [Ca2C]i elevation [29] – needs to be better
www.sciencedirect.com

1 Delpire, E. (2000) Cation–chloride cotransporters in neuronal communication. News Physiol. Sci. 15, 309–311
2 Ben-Ari, Y. (2002) Excitatory actions of GABA during development:
the nature of the nurture. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 728–739
3 Owens, D.F. and Kriegstein, A.R. (2002) Is there more to GABA than
synaptic inhibition? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 715–727
4 Gulledge, A.T. and Stuart, G.J. (2003) Excitatory actions of GABA in
the cortex. Neuron 37, 299–309
5 Martina, M. et al. (2001) Cell-type-specific GABA responses and
chloride homeostasis in the cortex and amygdala. J. Neurophysiol. 86,
2887–2895
6 Chavas, J. and Marty, A. (2003) Coexistence of excitatory and
inhibitory GABA synapses in the cerebellar interneuron network.
J. Neurosci. 23, 2019–2031
7 Lu, T. and Trussell, L.O. (2001) Mixed excitatory and inhibitory
GABA-mediated transmission in chick cochlear nucleus. J. Physiol.
535, 125–131
8 Voipio, J. and Kaila, K. (2000) GABAergic excitation and KC-mediated
volume transmission in the hippocampus. Prog. Brain Res. 125,
329–338
9 Isomura, Y. et al. (2003) Synaptically activated ClK accumulation
responsible for depolarizing GABAergic responses in mature hippocampal neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 90, 2752–2756
10 Lamsa, K. and Taira, T. (2003) Use-dependent shift from inhibitory to
excitatory GABAA receptor action in SP-O interneurons in the rat
hippocampal CA3 area. J. Neurophysiol. 90, 1983–1995
11 Woodin, M. et al. (2003) Coincident pre- and postsynaptic activity
modifies GABAergic synapses by postsynaptic changes in ClK
transporter activity. Neuron 39, 807–820
12 Rivera, C. et al. (2004) Mechanism of activity-dependent downregulation of the neuron-specific K–Cl cotransporter KCC2.
J. Neurosci. 24, 4683–4691
13 Thompson, S.M. and Ga¨hwiler, B. (1989) Activity-dependent disinhibition. I. Repetitive stimulation reduces IPSP driving force and
conductance in the hippocampus in ftro. J. Neurophysiol. 61, 501–511
14 Kaila, K. and Voipio, J. (1987) Postsynaptic fall in intracellular pH
induced by GABA-activated bicarbonate conductance. Nature 330,
163–165
15 Ruusuvuori, E. et al. (2004) Carbonic anhydrase isoform VII acts as a
molecular switch in the development of synchronous gammafrequency firing of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells. J. Neurosci.
24, 2699–2707
16 Rivera, C. et al. (2005) Two developmental switches in GABAergic
signalling: the KC–ClK cotransporter KCC2 and carbonic anhydrase
CAVII. J. Physiol. 562, 27–36
17 Wagner, S. et al. (1997) GABA in the mammalian suprachiasmatic
nucleus and its role in diurnal rhythmicity. Nature 387, 598–603
18 Ikeda, M. et al. (2003) Developmental and circadian changes in Ca2C
mobilization mediated by GABAA and NMDA receptors in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus. Eur. J. Neurosci. 17, 58–70
19 Cohen, I. et al. (2002) On the origin of interictal activity in human
temporal lobe epilepsy in ftro. Science 298, 1418–1421
20 Cohen, I. et al. (2003) Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: a pathological
replay of developmental mechanisms? Biol. Cell. 95, 329–333
21 Schwartz-Bloom, R.D. and Sah, R. (2001) g-aminobutyric acid
neurotransmission and cerebral ischemia. J. Neurochem. 77, 353–371
22 Coull, J.A.M. et al. (2003) Trans-synaptic shift in anion gradient in
spinal lamina I neurons as a mechanism of neuropathic pain. Nature
424, 938–942
23 Stewart, R.R. et al. (2002) Neural progenitor cells of the neonatal rat
anterior subventricular zone express functional GABA(A) receptors.
J. Neurobiol. 50, 305–322
24 Wang, D.D. et al. (2003) GABA depolarizes neuronal progenitors of the
postnatal subventricular zone via GABAA receptor activation.
J. Physiol. 550, 785–800
25 Nguyen, L. et al. (2003) Autocrine/paracrine activation of the GABAA

Review

TRENDS in Neurosciences Vol.28 No.6 June 2005

receptor inhibits the proliferation of neurogenic polysialylated neural
cell adhesion molecule-positive (PSA-NCAMC) precursor cells from
postnatal striatum. J. Neurosci. 23, 3278–3294
26 Bolteus, A.J. and Bordey, A. (2004) GABA release and uptake regulate
neuronal precursor migration in the postnatal subventricular zone.
J. Neurosci. 24, 7623–7631
27 Connor, J.A. et al. (1987) Depolarization- and transmitter-induced
changes in intracellular Ca2C of rat cerebellar granule cells in explant
cultures. J. Neurosci. 7, 1384–1400
28 Segal, M. (1993) GABA induces a unique rise of [Ca]i in cultured rat
hippocampal neurons. Hippocampus 3, 229–238

29 Chavas, J. et al. (2004) Osmotic tension as a possible link between
GABAA receptor activation and intracellular calcium elevation.
Neuron 44, 701–713
30 Zhang, S.J. and Jackson, M.B. (1995) GABAA receptor activation and
the excitability of nerve terminals in the rat posterior pituitary.
J. Physiol. 483, 583–595
31 Gao, X-B. et al. (1998) GABA-dependent firing of glutamate-evoked
action potentials at AMPA/kainate receptors in developing hypothalamic neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 79, 716–726

Articles of interest in Current Opinion journals
From monkeys to humans: what do we now know about brain homologies?
Martin I. Sereno and Roger B.H. Tootell
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 15, 135–144
See me, hear me, touch me: multisensory integration in lateral occipital–temporal cortex
Michael S. Beauchamp
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 15, 145–153
Perceptual learning: specificity versus generalization
Manfred Fahle
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 15, 154–160
Reorganization and plasticity in the adult brain during learning of motor skills
Julien Doyon and Habib Benali
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 15, 161–167
The primate hippocampus: ontogeny, early insult and memory
Jocelyne Bachevalier and Faraneh Vargha-Khadem
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 15, 168–174
Directing the mind’s eye: prefrontal, inferior and medial temporal mechanisms for visual working memory
Charan Ranganath and Mark D’Esposito
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 15, 175–182
The frontal lobes and the regulation of mental activity
Sharon L. Thompson-Schill, Marina Bedny and Robe-rt F. Goldberg
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 15, 219-224
www.sciencedirect.com

289

