THE JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE NEUROLOGY 496:314 –334 (2006)

Unique Combination of Anatomy and
Physiology in Cells of the Rat
Paralaminar Thalamic Nuclei Adjacent to
the Medial Geniculate Body
PHILIP H. SMITH,1* EDWARD L. BARTLETT,2 AND ANNA KOWALKOWSKI1
1
Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin, Medical School—Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin 53706
2
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205

ABSTRACT
The medial geniculate body (MGB) has three major subdivisions, ventral (MGV), dorsal
(MGD), and medial (MGM). MGM is linked with paralaminar nuclei that are situated medial
and ventral to MGV/MGD. Paralaminar nuclei have unique inputs and outputs compared
with MGV and MGD and have been linked to circuitry underlying some important functional
roles. We recorded intracellularly from cells in the paralaminar nuclei in vitro. We found that
they possess an unusual combination of anatomical and physiological features compared with
those reported for “standard” thalamic neurons seen in the MGV/MGD and elsewhere in the
thalamus. Compared with MGV/MGD neurons, anatomically, 1) paralaminar cell dendrites
can be long, branch sparingly, and encompass a much larger area; 2) their dendrites may be
smooth but can have well deﬁned spines; and 3) their axons can have collaterals that branch
locally within the same or nearby paralaminar nuclei. When compared with MGV/MGD
neurons, physiologically, 1) their spikes are larger in amplitude and can be shorter in
duration; 2) their spikes can have dual afterhyperpolarizations with fast and slow components; and 3) they can have a reduction or complete absence of the low-threshold, voltagesensitive calcium conductance that reduces or eliminates the voltage-dependent burst response. We also recorded from cells in the parafascicular nucleus, a nucleus of the posterior
intralaminar nuclear group, because they have unusual anatomical features that are similar
to those of some of our paralaminar cells. As with the labeled paralaminar cells, parafascicular cells had physiological features distinguishing them from typical thalamic neurons. J.
Comp. Neurol. 496:314 –334, 2006. © 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Indexing terms: calcium burst; intralaminar nuclei; parafascicular nucleus

Since the early brain-slice work of Jahnsen and Llinas
(1984a,b), studies have shown that thalamocortical (TC)
cells function in two different response modes, “burst” and
“tonic,” that depend on the activation of a low-threshold,
voltage-sensitive calcium (Ca) conductance, which generates a transient current known as IT. At a membrane
potential of about –70 mV, synaptic inputs to TC cells
activate the Ca conductance, resulting in a large, rapid
depolarization that can elicit three to ﬁve high-frequency
(Ͼ200 Hz) spikes with variable ﬁrst-spike timing. If depolarized to –50 or – 60 mV, the Ca conductance is inactivated, and the same synaptic input will instead elicit a
shorter latency, well-timed spike. Thus, a TC cell’s ﬁring
mode alters its spike response to ascending synaptic mes© 2006 WILEY-LISS, INC.

sages (see Sherman, 2001) and subsequently the temporal
information being sent to cortex.
Reports of recordings from cells in the auditory thalamus or medial geniculate body (MGB; Hu, 1995; Peruzzi et

Grant sponsor: National Institutes of Health; Grant number: R01
DC006212 (to P.H.S.).
*Correspondence to: Philip H. Smith, Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin, 1300 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706.
E-mail: smith@physiology.wisc.edu
Received 4 August 2005; Revised 30 September 2005; Accepted 22 November 2005
DOI 10.1002/cne.20913
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF PARALAMINAR CELLS
al., 1997; Tennigkeit et al., 1997; Bartlett and Smith,
1999) conﬁrmed that virtually all TC cells in the two main
MGB subdivisions, the dorsal and ventral MGB (MGD and
MGV), show membrane potential dependent burst and
tonic modes. MGV and MGD are the two primary areas of
the auditory thalamus. MGV is part of the tonotopically
organized primary or “lemniscal” pathway, whereas MGD
is a component of the “extra- or nonlemniscal” division
(Clerici and Coleman, 1990; Clerici et al., 1990; Winer et
al., 1999). In rats, almost all neurons in these regions are
thalamocortical, projecting to intermediate layers of the
auditory cortex (Roger and Arnault, 1989; Arnault and
Roger, 1990; Clerici and Coleman, 1990; McMullen and de
Venecia, 1993; Khazaria and Weinberg, 1994; Winer et al.,
1999). In MGV, the TC cells have been called tufted or
bushy based on highly intertwined dendritic trees. MGD is
less homogeneous, but many TC cells here are classiﬁed as
either tufted or stellate.
A third subdivision of the auditory thalamic complex,
the medial division (MGM), has been described. MGM is
one of a group of nuclei referred to as paralaminar
(Herkenham, 1980) situated medial and ventromedial to
the MGB. This group also includes the posterior interlaminar (PIN), suprageniculate (SG), and peripeduncular (PP)
nuclei (Winer and Morest, 1983; LeDoux et al., 1987;
Winer and Larue, 1988). Several unique features have
been described regarding these areas. First, anatomical
studies showed that, compared with MGV and MGD, cells
here have the least uniformity of soma size (Morest, 1964;
Clerici and Coleman, 1990; Clerici et al., 1990; Winer et
al., 1999). Some dendritic trees may have tufted or stellate
morphology, like MGV and MGD cells, but many others
can show long, sparsely branching dendrites. Second, the
inputs to these areas are multimodal, arriving not only
from the inferior colliculus (IC) but from visual, somatosensory, and other centers as well (LeDoux et al., 1984,
1987; Peschanski, 1984; Hicks et al., 1986; Arnault and
Roger, 1987; Bordi and LeDoux, 1994a,b; Benedek et al.,
1997; Linke et al., 1999). Third, the outputs of cells here
are diverse. As with MGV and MGD neurons, some cells in
MGM and the other paralaminar nuclei are thalamocortical (Scheel, 1988; Roger and Arnault, 1989; Arnault and
Roger, 1990; Clerici and Coleman, 1990; Brett et al., 1994;
Linke, 1999; Winer et al., 1999; Doron and LeDoux, 2000),
but, unlike MGV and MGD cells, they often project to
layer 1 (Niimi and Matsuoka, 1979; Mitani et al., 1984,
1987; Linke and Schwegler, 2000; Kimura et al., 2003).
Jones (1998a,b) speculated that this layer 1 projection
may engage multiple cortical areas at times when it is
necessary to “bind” the many aspects of a sensory experience together. This projection has also been implicated in
the modulation of the cortical high-frequency 40-Hz
gamma oscillations (Barth and McDonald, 1996; Sukov
and Barth, 2001) and the expression of long-term cortical
plasticity (Weinberger et al., 1995; Weinberger, 1998).
Another major projection of paralaminar cells is to the
amygdala. Work from LeDoux and others has shown this
connection to be a vital part of the pathway responsible for
the behavioral and autonomic responses elicited by the
conditioned fear response (see, e.g., LeDoux et al., 1986,
1988; LeDoux, 1995; LeDoux and Muller, 1997; Linke et
al., 2000, 2004). Paralaminar cells can also project to the
basal ganglia (Moriizumi and Hattori, 1992; ShammahLagnodo et al., 1996; LeDoux et al., 1985) and the inferior
colliculus (Senatorov and Hu, 2002; Winer et al., 2002).

315

Despite the participation of cells in the MGM and other
paralaminar nuclei in the important functions listed
above and their unusual inputs and outputs, no one has
taken advantage of the slice preparation to compare their
physiological properties with those of their “standard” TC
counterparts. We have made sharp electrode recordings
from MGM cells and cells of the adjacent paralaminar
nuclei by using thalamic slices. We found that in vitro
data from cells here reveal several unique and potentially
important features that distinguish them from “standard”
TC cells (see Sherman and Guillery, 2001).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Intracellular recording
All methods were approved by the University of Wisconsin Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Animals were maintained in an American Associations for
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care-approved facility. Our experimental methods are similar to those described previously (Peruzzi et al., 1997; Bartlett and
Smith, 1999, 2002). Brain slices from 3– 6-week-old LongEvans hooded rats of either gender were used. Rats were
given an anesthetic overdose then perfused transcardially
with chilled, oxygenated sucrose saline (described below).
The portion of the brain containing the thalamus was
removed, and 500-␮m horizontal or coronal slices were
taken through the MGB. These two slice planes were used
so that we could stimulate two major inputs to the MGM,
the IC inputs in horizontal slices and the superior collicular (SC) inputs in coronal slices. Details of these synaptic
inputs will be reported in a subsequent paper. Slices were
placed in a submersion-style holding chamber containing
oxygenated artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid (ACSF) at room
temperature. After equilibration, one slice was transferred to the recording chamber and perfused with normal, oxygenated ACSF at 33–34°C, which contained the
following (in mM): NaCl, 124; KCl, 5; KH2PO4, 1.2; CaCl2,
2.4; MgSO4, 1.3; NaHCO3, 26; and glucose, 10. The sucrose ACSF contained sucrose instead of NaCl (Aghajanian and Rasmussen, 1989). For low-calcium saline, the
calcium concentration was reduced from 2.4 mM to 0.4
mM. Nickel (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO),
4-aminopyridine (4AP; Sigma-Aldrich Co.), and apamin
(Vector, Burlingame, CA) were all mixed in ACSF at the
stated concentrations on the day of the experiment and
bath applied. Recording began at least 30 minutes after
the slices were placed in the recording chamber.
Intracellular recordings of responses to injected current
were made with glass microelectrodes of 100 –150 M⍀
resistance when ﬁlled with a solution of 2 M potassium
acetate and 2% Neurobiotin (Vector). Cells were considered viable if their initial resting potential was more negative than –50 mV and their action potentials overshot 0
mV. Intracellular current and voltage records were digitized with a Digidata 1322A (Axon Instruments, Burlingame, CA) and saved in pClamp software for subsequent
analysis.

Histology
During intracellular recording, Neurobiotin was injected into the recorded cell with a 0.3– 0.5-nA current for
2–10 minutes. After the experiment, the slice was ﬁxed in
fresh 4% paraformaldehyde and cryoprotected, and 60 –

316

P.H. SMITH ET AL.

70-␮m frozen sections were cut and collected in 0.1 M
phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. The sections were then incubated in H2O2, rinsed in phosphate buffer, then refrigerated and incubated overnight in the avidin-biotinhorseradish peroxidase (HRP) complex (ABC Kit; Vector).
On the following day, the sections were rinsed in phosphate buffer, and the Neurobiotin was reacted with the
diaminobenzidine (DAB)-nickel/cobalt intensiﬁcation
method, mounted, counterstained with cresyl violet, and
coverslipped.
To determine a cell’s location and make morphological
measurements, camera lucida drawings were made. A
low-power, ϫ40 drawing of the MGB and surrounding
structures was made and the location of the labeled cell
noted. The location of the cell body relative to the divisions
of the rat MGB was determined by published reports of
the differences in Nissl staining between MGM and SG
(LeDoux et al., 1985) and by other landmarks in the vicinity that distinguish the location of PP and PIN. We also
compared our sections/drawings with sections in the atlas
of Paxinos and Watson (1986), illustrations in the cytoarchitectural study of Clerici and Coleman (1990), and the
illustration of paralaminar subdivisions by LeDoux et al.
(1985) and Doron and LeDoux (2000). A high-power,
ϫ1,250 drawing of the cell body, dendritic tree, and initial
portion of the axon was also made.

Data analysis, anatomy
Several measurements of the cell body and dendritic
tree of our intracellularly labeled cells were made so that
they could be compared with similar data from tufted and
stellate cells in the MGV and MGD that we previously
reported (Bartlett and Smith, 1999). The measurements
described here were taken from the high-power drawing of
the cell. Measurements were made only from cells where it
was apparent that the majority of the dendrites were
intact as indicated by the fact that they did not end
abruptly at the top or bottom of the slice. Cell body areas
were determined by drawing the outline of the cell body in
Neurolucida software (MicroBrightField, Colchester, VT).
Dendritic tree area was determined in the same software
by drawing a line between the ends of adjacent dendrites
and measuring the enclosed area. Another measure of the
extent of the dendritic tree was dendritic projection distance, for which we measured and averaged the length of
a cell’s three longest dendrites. As a measure of dendritic
branching, we used scaled circles of 50 and 100 ␮m, centered on the cell body, and counted the number of dendrites extending beyond these distances. This value was
termed the number of dendritic intersections.

Data analysis, physiology
Several variables of the basic cell physiology were measured in Clampﬁt software (Axon Instruments) so that the
data could be compared with our previous data from cells
in the MGV and MGD (Bartlett and Smith, 1999). Resting
potential was measured as the difference between the
voltage measured extracellularly and intracellularly during recording. Input resistance was measured from the
maximal voltage deﬂection to a – 0.1-nA current pulse.
Spike amplitude was measured as the voltage difference
between rest and spike peak. Spike threshold was measured as the least amount of positive current required to
generate a spike. Spike duration was measured as the
duration of the spike at half-amplitude. The amplitude of

the low-threshold Ca conductance was measured by the
area under the rebound burst that occurred when the cell
was hyperpolarized and then returned to rest. The range
of DC levels over which a burst occurred was measured by
injecting depolarizing or hyperpolarizing current to move
the membrane potential around rest and noting whether a
– 0.3-0.5-nA current pulse elicited a burst.
Statistical analysis was performed in Origin Pro7 (OriginLab, Northampton, MA) and Microscoft Excel (Microscoft Corp., Seattle, WA). Data are presented as
mean Ϯ SD. A P value of Յ0.05 was considered to represent a signiﬁcant difference.

RESULTS
We labeled 91 cells in 67 slices taken from 53 rats of
either sex that were medial or ventral to the MGV/MGD in
one of the adjacent paralaminar nuclei. No differences
were noted in the basic anatomy or physiology of these
cells between subdivisions, so they will be described as a
single population. The terms MGM and paralaminar will
be used interchangeably from this point onward.

Anatomy
Cell bodies. Clerici and Coleman (1990) and Winer et
al. (1999) reported that rat MGM cell size is more diverse
than MGV/MGD cell size, with the largest of MGM cell
bodies classiﬁed as magnocellular. This was also the case
with our intracellularly labeled population (Fig. 1).
Paralaminar cell bodies showed a larger range of sizes
(from 118 to 451 ␮m2, mean 259 Ϯ 81.5) than MGV/MGD
cells (from 122 to 226 ␮m2 mean 175 Ϯ 35.8). In addition,
one-way ANOVA indicated a signiﬁcant difference among
the means of MGM cell, MGV/MGD tufted cell, and MGD
stellate cell sizes [F(2,37) ϭ 5.26, P ϭ 0.01]. Post hoc tests
for differences in means showed that, although the mean
for paralaminar cell size (259 Ϯ 81.5 ␮m2) was greater
than that for stellate cells (182 Ϯ 44.5 ␮m2) and tufted
cells (171 Ϯ 33.1 ␮m2), signiﬁcance was reached only for
the paralaminar/tufted cell difference (t-test, P Ͻ 0.01).
Dendritic trees. By using Golgi staining methods,
Clerici and Coleman (1990) and Winer et al. (1999) reported on the dendritic tree conﬁgurations of rat MGM
cells. Their sections were 100 –150 ␮m thick, whereas our
slices were 500 ␮m thick, so we were able to get a more
complete picture of the tree conﬁguration.
We noted signiﬁcant differences in dendritic tree features of cells in the MGM and other paralaminar nuclei
compared with those of tufted and stellate cells previously
reported in MGV and MGD (Bartlett and Smith, 1999).
For cells labeled in slices taken in either the horizontal or
the coronal plane, some of our labeled paralaminar cells
had multipolar or stellate dendritic conﬁgurations. For
these cells, it was apparent that all or a large majority of
the dendritic tree was present in the slice (Fig. 2). A
number of the paralaminar cells labeled in coronal slices
displayed elongated dendritic trees that extended for considerable distances primarily in the dorsoventral direction
(Fig. 3). We saw cells labeled in our horizontal slices with
several of their major dendrites cut off at the top and
bottom of the slice and assume that these are probably the
same elongate cells. Such cells from horizontal slices with
incomplete dendritic trees were not included in the analysis. In the coronal plane, these cells with elongated, oriented trees had a small number of long, sparsely branch-

Fig. 1. Camera lucida drawings of the cell bodies and primary dendrites of tufted and stellate cells in
the dorsal (MGD) and ventral (MGV) divisions of the MGB in comparison with similar drawings made of
stellate and elongate cells in the intralaminar nuclei adjacent to the MGB that were labeled either in the
coronal (MGM-C) or horizontal (MGM-H) plane. Scale bar ϭ 50 ␮m (applies to all).

318

Fig. 2. Comparison of paralaminar multipolar/stellate cells with
stellate and tufted cells of the MGV and MGD. 1–7: Camera lucida
drawings of seven multipolar/stellate cells located in the medial division of the medial geniculate or other paralaminar nuclei adjacent to
the medial geniculate. Cells 2 and 7 were labeled in the coronal plane,

P.H. SMITH ET AL.

cells 1 and 3– 6 in the horizontal plane. 8 –12: Camera lucida drawings
of ﬁve tufted neurons located in the ventral or dorsal divisions of the
medial geniculate. 13,14: Camera lucida drawings of stellate cells
located in the dorsal division of the medial geniculate. Scale bar ϭ 100
␮m (applies to all).

Fig. 3. Comparison of elongate cells in the paralaminar nuclei
with stellate and tufted cells in the MGV and MGD. 1– 6: Camera
lucida drawings of examples of cells in the paralaminar nuclei labeled
in the coronal plane exhibiting very long, sparsely branching dendritic
trees, which could display numerous spines (cell 2 inset) or only an

occasional spine or no spines (cell 4 inset). 7–13: Camera lucida
drawings of tufted (7–11) or stellate (12,13) cells labeled in the ventral
or dorsal divisions of MGB. These are the same MGB cells seen in
Figure 2. Scale bar ϭ 100 ␮m (applies to all).

320
ing dendrites that could extend for over 1 mm. The
terminal branches often encroached on a paralaminar nucleus adjacent to the one containing the cell body (Figs. 4,
5). Despite their dorsoventral extent, dendrites of these
cells usually did not venture far enough laterally to encroach signiﬁcantly on the MGV or MGD. There was no
clear correlation between soma size and the area of the
dendritic arbor, except that the smallest MGM cells (areas
less than 175 ␮m2) had the smallest arbor areas, which
were still larger than the MGV arbor areas. Thus, cell
bodies that were intermediate in size (200 –300 ␮m2) and
cell bodies that could be classiﬁed as magnocellular (soma
areas greater than 300 ␮m2) could have large, elongate
dendritic trees with large areas but could also have
multipolar/stellate dendritic trees with smaller areas.
As might be expected from their extensive dendritic
lengths, the dendritic tree areas of these elongate cells
were signiﬁcantly larger than those of tufted or stellate
cells of the MGV and MGD. A one-way ANOVA on the
dendritic trees of MGM cells labeled in the coronal slices
and stellate and tufted cell dendrites in the MGV and
MGD showed signiﬁcant differences in the means
[F(2,34) ϭ 15.88, P Ͻ 0.0001]. Post hoc t-tests for the
differences in the means showed that the dendritic tree
areas of MGM cells measured in this plane (122,260 Ϯ
64,701 ␮m2) were signiﬁcantly larger than both the MGV/
MGD tufted (area ϭ 29,333 Ϯ 5,777 ␮m2, P Ͻ 0.0001) and
MGD stellate (62,830 Ϯ 12,723 ␮m2, P Ͻ 0.05) dendritic
trees. The larger examples of elongate dendritic trees
could measure over four times greater than the average
MGD stellate cell and over 8 –10 times the average MGV/
MGD tufted cells. Likewise, the length of the three longest
MGM dendrites of these elongate cells in the coronal plane
could be over 500 ␮m. The results of a one-way ANOVA
showed signiﬁcant differences among the means of the
groups [F(2,29) ϭ 27.0, P Ͻ 0.0001]. Post hoc t-tests revealed that the MGM cell dendrites in the coronal plane
were signiﬁcantly longer (372 Ϯ 111 ␮m) than dendrites of
either tufted cells in MGV/MGD (143 Ϯ 19.2 ␮m, P Ͻ
0.0001) or stellate cells in MGD (204.7 Ϯ 19.2 ␮m, P Ͻ
0.002).
One simple way in which we quantiﬁed and compared
dendritic branching patterns between paralaminar and
MGV/MGD neurons was to count the number of branches
located at 50 ␮m or 100 ␮m radial to the cell body. Oneway ANOVA showed a signiﬁcant difference in the means
when comparing these features for MGM cells, tufted cells
in MGV/MGD, and stellate cells in MGD [at 50 ␮m,
F(2,32) ϭ 87.8, P Ͻ 0.0001; at 100 ␮m, F(2,32) ϭ 38.2, P Ͻ
0.0001]. Post hoc analysis of the means revealed that the
paralaminar elongate cells (as illustrated in Fig. 3) had
signiﬁcantly fewer branches at both 50 ␮m (8 Ϯ 3.73) and
100 ␮m (10.9 Ϯ 4.4) than either tufted cells (40.2 Ϯ 9.2,
P Ͻ 0.0001; 22.4 Ϯ 7.9, P Ͻ 0.001) or stellate cells (29.7 Ϯ
5.89, P Ͻ 0.001; 32.8 Ϯ 5.4, P Ͻ 0.001) in MGV/MGD.
ANOVA tests also revealed that the dendritic branching
patterns of the stellate/multipolar population of MGM
cells were signiﬁcantly different from the patterns of their
counterparts in the MGD at both 50 ␮m [F(2,27) ϭ 63.1,
P Ͻ 0.0001] and 100 ␮m [F(2,27) ϭ 19.7, P Ͻ 0.0001]. Post
hoc t-test analysis indicated that the MGM stellate/
multipolar cells had signiﬁcantly (P Ͻ 0.0001) fewer
branches at 50 ␮m (8.75 Ϯ 2.6) and 100 ␮m (12.9 Ϯ 4.3)
than their counterpart stellate cells in MGD (at 50 ␮m,
29.7 Ϯ 5.89; at 100 ␮m, 32.8 Ϯ 5.4). However, despite

P.H. SMITH ET AL.
having fewer branches, the dendritic tree areas of the
MGM stellate cells (59,808 Ϯ 26,895 ␮m2) did not differ
signiﬁcantly from those of the MGD stellate cells
(62,830 Ϯ 12,723 ␮m2)
Another unique feature of some (20%) of the MGM/
paralaminar cells was the presence of numerous dendritic
spines along the length of the dendrite (Fig. 3, cell 2 inset;
Fig. 4D). Although we (Bartlett and Smith, 1999) and
others (Winer et al., 1999) have seen some dendritic specializations (knob-like bumps, short dendritic appendages,
some spines) on MGV or MGD TC cells, those on MGM
cells could be more numerous and more consistently resembled spines (a distinct spine head and shaft). These
spiny dendrites could belong to either the multipolar/
stellate or the elongate cell types. In contrast, the remainder of the stellate and elongate cells had dendritic trees
with very few spines (Fig. 3, cell 4 inset). These cells were
darkly labeled, so it was not simply a problem of being
unable to visualize appendages.
Thus, the paralaminar cell bodies had a wider range of
sizes and tended to be larger than tufted MGV/MGD cells.
The dendritic trees of cells in paralaminar nuclei could be
multipolar/stellate or could be elongate, extending for very
long distances, primarily in the coronal plane. MGM elongate cell dendritic trees encompassed a signiﬁcantly
larger area than those of stellate cells in MGD or tufted
cells in MGV/MGD. Stellate/multipolar cells in MGM had
dendritic trees that were signiﬁcantly larger than tufted
MGV/MGD cells but not different from stellates in MGD.
Both elongate and multipolar/stellate cell types in MGM
tended to have fewer dendritic branches than the MGV
and MGD cell types and could bear numerous dendritic
spines. Cell body size was not a good predictor of dendritic
size except that smaller cell bodies tended to have smaller
dendritic trees. We labeled only a small number of cells in
the paralaminar nuclei that might be considered tufted,
and these were usually close to the borders between the
paralaminar and the dorsal or ventral nuclei. They were
not included in the analysis.
Axons. Another difference between TC cells in MGV
and MGD and cells in adjacent paralaminar nuclei was
the presence of local axon collaterals. In our previous
study (Bartlett and Smith, 1999), none of the TC cells in
MGV and MGD showed axon collaterals within or near the
MGB. In contrast, some (10%) of our MGM cells displayed
one or more collaterals (Figs. 4, 5) with en passant and en
terminaux swellings (Figs 4C, arrows). This percentage is
likely to be an underestimate, because these collaterals
could arise several hundred micrometers down the main
axon (Fig. 4A), and, in slice preparations, main axons are
often cut off close to their origin on the cell body or dendritic tree. The collaterals typically arose from the axons
of cells that also had spiny dendritic trees. They could
branch and display swellings near the parent cell (Fig. 5)
or could come off the main axon at more distant sites to
innervate other paralaminar regions (Fig. 4). None of the
collaterals was seen entering MGV or MGD.

Physiology
General. Stable intracellular recordings from cells in
paralaminar nuclei could last for several hours, and resting membrane potentials (– 65 Ϯ 6.7 mV) were not significantly different from those of cells in MGV and MGD that
we previously reported (– 62.2 Ϯ 8.8 mV). Action potential
amplitudes of paralaminar cells (72.1 Ϯ 10.9 mV) were

Fig. 4. Elongate cell in a paralaminar nucleus. A: Camera lucida
drawing of the cell body, dendritic tree, axon (a), and axon collaterals
(ac). This cell is also seen in Figure 3 (cell 6). B: Location of the cell in
the suprageniculate nucleus (SG). C: Photomicrographs illustrating
several en passant and en terminaux swellings (arrows) along axon

collaterals. The micrograph on the left also contains an out-of-focus
dendrite (d) of the labeled cell. D: Photomicrographs of portions of the
dendritic tree illustrating the dendritic spines (arrows). Scale bars ϭ
100 ␮m in A, 100 ␮m for B; 10 ␮m in C (applies to C,D).

322

P.H. SMITH ET AL.

Fig. 5. Elongate cell in a paralaminar nucleus. A: Camera lucida drawing of an elongate cell body,
dendritic tree, and axon. This cell is also illustrated in Figure 3 (cell 2). B: Cell body, main axon, and axon
collaterals of the same cell with the dendrites removed. C: Location of the cell at the ventromendial
border of the suprageniculate nucleus (SG). Scale bar ϭ 100 ␮m in A (applies to A–B).

signiﬁcantly larger than those of the MGV/MGD cell population (61.3 Ϯ 10.3 mV, P Ͻ 0.0001), as were their input
resistances (82.6 Ϯ 49.6 m⍀ vs. 55.2 Ϯ 31 m⍀, P Ͻ 0.005).
Bursting response. The most striking response feature of many of the paralaminar cells was the absence or
reduction of the low-threshold, voltage-sensitive calcium
conductance that elicits the burst ﬁring response that is so
prominent in all thalamocortical cells in the MGV and
MGD and elsewhere in the sensory thalamus. A typical
bimodal spike response of an MGV or MGD cell to depolarizing current pulses at various membrane potentials is
illustrated in Figure 6A. At depolarized levels (Fig. 6A, top
trace), the cell ﬁres in a sustained, irregular fashion. At
more negative levels, the same depolarization activates
the calcium burst over a large range of membrane potentials (Fig. 6A, third to ﬁfth traces). Responses shown in
Figure 6B,C are examples from two different paralaminar
cells. For some paralaminar cells (25%), the cell ﬁred in a
regular, sustained fashion at all membrane potentials
when the current pulse was suprathreshold (Fig. 6B, top
four traces). At more hyperpolarized levels, these cells
stopped ﬁring, with no indication of a calcium burst (Fig.
6B, ﬁfth trace), nor could these bursts be elicited at higher
current levels at these membrane potentials (not shown).
Other paralaminar cells (24%) showed persistent ﬁring at

depolarized levels, but with some spike frequency adaptation (Fig. 6C, top four traces). Again, these cells would
show little or no indication of a burst at more hyperpolarized levels. Some of these cells with little or no burst
response could ﬁre at high sustained rates, sometimes
over 400 Hz, when depolarized (Fig. 7A). Paralaminar
cells such as those shown in Figure 6B,C also did not
display typical rebound burst ﬁring after being hyperpolarized. Figure 7B illustrates the standard response of a
cell in MGV or MGD to a hyperpolarizing current pulse as
the membrane potential is moved around rest. At a fairly
wide range of potentials, the hyperpolarization deactivates the Ca conductance such that when the membrane
is repolarized the activated Ca conductance elicits an offset burst. Figure 7C illustrates the response of a paralaminar neuron to a similar set of stimuli. No rebound burst is
elicited at any membrane potential.
Other paralaminar cells (44%) did show what appeared
to be a calcium burst that generated a series of sodium
spikes. Figure 6D,E illustrates two examples. At depolarized levels, these paralaminar cells ﬁred in a regular fashion. As the cells were stepped to more hyperpolarized
levels, they could ﬁrst show an onset response (Fig. 6D,
third panel) and then a burst (33%, Fig. 6D, fourth panel)
or could show a burst followed by a pause and a resump-

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF PARALAMINAR CELLS

323

Fig. 6. Comparison of the basic response properties of thalamocortical cells in the MGV and MGD with those of cells in the paralaminar
nuclei. A: Typical response of a tufted or stellate cell in the MGV or
MGD to suprathreshold depolarizing current pulses as the cell was
held at different membrane potentials. Voltages next to traces indicate DC level of the cell. B–D: Top ﬁve traces. Typical responses of
paralaminar cells to suprathreshold current pulses as the cells were
held at different membrane potentials similar to those indicated in
column A. Bottom traces in B compare an action potential from the

MGV cell whose response is shown in A (top spike) with an action
potential from the paralaminar cell whose response is shown in B
(bottom spike). Bottom traces in C, D, and E illustrate action potentials from the paralaminar cells in C, D, and E. Time scale bar in row
4 of B ϭ 100 msec and applies to all traces showing response to
current pulses. Time scale bar in row 5 of B ϭ 5 msec and applies to
all single spike traces at the bottom of B–E. Voltage scale bar in each
column ϭ 20 mV and applies to all current injection traces in that
column.

tion of sustained activity (11%, Fig. 6E, second panel) and
then a burst only (Fig. 6E, fourth panel). Rebound bursts
could also be generated in these paralaminar cells (Fig.
7D). We used the area under the rebound bursts as a
measure of the burst amplitude and compared these values for paralaminar cells that showed a burst with the TC
cells in the MGV/MGD. Paralaminar cells with burst responses had signiﬁcantly smaller bursts (593.9 Ϯ 390
arbitrary units) than MGV/MGD cells (851.8 Ϯ 301, P Ͻ
0.002). As might be expected, these smaller paralaminar
calcium bursts generated a signiﬁcantly lower spike rate
(206.3 Ϯ 103.2 Hz) than that seen in MGV/MGD cells
(264.6 Ϯ 64.2 Hz, P Ͻ 0.002).

Action potential. Another unique feature of the response of many paralaminar cells was the action potential
afterhyperpolarization (AHP); 72% of our MGM cells displayed spikes with biphasic AHPs (bAHPs) consisting of a
fast and a slow component, whereas the rest showed
monophasic AHPs (mAHPs) like those of MGV/MGD cells.
Paralaminar cells with no apparent calcium burst and
also those with bursts could display action potentials with
either biphasic or monophasic action potentials. Biphasic
AHPs are never seen in recordings from MGV/MGD cells
(Bartlett and Smith, 1999). The bottom panel in Figure 6B
compares the action potential of the MGV TC cell whose
responses are seen in Figure 6A (top spike) with one from

Fig. 7. Sustained ﬁring (A) and rebound responses after hyperpolarizing current pulses (B). A: Response of a paralaminar cell to current
pulses of increasing current strength (top to bottom). B: Typical response
of a tufted or stellate cell in the MGV or MGD to hyperpolarizing current
pulses as the cell was held at different membrane potentials. The cell
shows a rebound burst over a wide range of membrane potentials.
C: Typical response of some cells in the paralaminar nuclei adjacent to

MGB to similar hyperpolarizing current pulses as the cell was held at
different membrane potentials. No rebound burst could be elicited at any
membrane potential even if the amplitude of the current pulse was
increased (not shown) D: Response of some cells in an adjacent paralaminar nucleus that did show a calcium burst as the cell was held at
different membrane potentials. Scale bars ϭ 20 mV, 100 msec in A; 20
mV, 100 msec in B (applies to B–D).

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF PARALAMINAR CELLS
the paralaminar cell seen in Figure 6B (bottom spike). The
bottom panels of Figure 6C–E also illustrate spike waveforms of the other paralaminar cells in these columns.
Unlike the MGV cell monophasic spike AHP, three of the
four paralaminar cell spikes (B, D, and E) show a slow
component of the AHP.
We used the biphasic or monophasic nature of the action
potential AHP to divide MGM cells into two groups. We do
not know whether this represents a true functional subdivision of cell types, but differences in other features of
their physiology led us to make this distinction. First, as
described above, a comparison of the rebound burst size
for paralaminar cells that showed a calcium conductance
(regardless of the nature of their spike AHP) with cells in
the MGV/MGD demonstrated that the paralaminar cell
calcium conductance was signiﬁcantly smaller. However,
if the paralaminar cells were divided into those with
mAHPs or bAHPs, the burst size generated by the cells
with mAHPs was comparable to the burst size seen in
MGV and MGD cells, whereas the bursts of cells with
bAHP was signiﬁcantly smaller. ANOVA comparisons of
the area under the rebound bursts generated by paralaminar cells with mAHPs, by those with bAHPs, and by cells
in the MGV/MGD revealed a signiﬁcant difference
[F(2,93) ϭ 10.9, P Ͻ 0.0001]. Post hoc t-tests illustrated
that the paralaminar cells with mAHPs had rebound
bursts whose amplitudes (823 Ϯ 344 arbitrary units) were
not signiﬁcantly different from those of cells in MGV/MGD
(859 Ϯ 301), whereas both of these groups had signiﬁcantly larger bursts than the paralaminar cells with
bAHPs (511 Ϯ 374, P Ͻ 0.003 and P Ͻ 0.0001). A second
feature distinguishing the paralaminar cells with biphasic
vs monophasic AHPs was the cells input resistance. As we
described above, the paralaminar cell input resistances
were signiﬁcantly different from those of the MGV/MGD
cell population, but this was due to the high input resistances of the paralaminar cells with bAHPs. ANOVA evaluation of the means of MGV/MGD, paralaminar bAHP,
and paralaminar mAHP cell input resistances showed
that there were signiﬁcant differences [F(2,120) ϭ 6.56,
P Ͻ 0.002], but post hoc t-tests showed that the paralaminar bAHP cell input resistance (88.4 Ϯ 52.9 m⍀) was
signiﬁcantly different from that of the MGV/MGD cells
(55.2 Ϯ 31 m⍀, P Ͻ 0.01), whereas that of the paralaminar
mAHP cell was not. A ﬁnal feature of the paralaminar cell
that led us to make this distinction was action potential
duration. ANOVA comparisons followed by post hoc t-tests
showed no signiﬁcant differences in the mean values of
the MGV/MGD, paralaminar mAHP, or paralaminar
bAHP cell action potential half-widths, but those of the
paralaminar bAHPs spanned a much larger range (0.16 –
1.48 msec) than the other groups (0.34 – 0.9 msec). Spikes
with very short (Ͻ0.3 msec) half-widths exhibited by several paralaminar cells with bAHPs are comparable to
those reported for interneurons in the thalamus (Pape and
McCormick, 1995).
In summary, paralaminar cells can show little or no
calcium burst and a sustained regular or adaptive ﬁring
pattern over a large voltage range. This ﬁring can reach
very high rates. Their resting potentials are comparable to
those seen in MGV/MGD cells, but their action potentials
are larger. Their action potentials can show biphasic or
monophasic AHPs. Paralaminar cells that both do and do
not show bursting can have either bAHPs or mAHPs. For
those that burst, the size of the burst is smaller in those

325

cells with bAHPs. Other unique features of the paralaminar bAHP cells are the higher input resistance, the wide
range of action potential durations, and the rate of spiking
generated by the burst.
Veriﬁcation of the calcium conductance. Figures 8
and 9 verify that these bursts in some MGM cells are in
fact calcium mediated. Figure 8A shows that reduction of
the calcium concentration (lower panel) reduces the amplitude of the bursts (arrows) of a typical TC cell in MGV
to depolarizing and hyperpolarizing pulses (n ϭ 7 cells).
Likewise, a similar reduction in calcium levels reduces the
depolarization- and hyperpolarization-induced bursts
(Fig. 8B, arrows) in an MGM cell. For those paralaminar
cells with no noticeable burst, the sustained ﬁring would
persist when the calcium level was lowered (n ϭ 5 cells)
but at an altered rate (Fig. 8C). Nickel has been shown to
block/reduce the low-threshold Ca conductance in
thalamocortical cells (Hernandez-Cruz and Pape, 1989).
Figure 9A illustrates that nickel reduces both the
depolarization-induced and the rebound Ca burst in a TC
cell in MGD. Figure 9B,D shows representative responses
from two cells in the paralaminar nuclei, and in both cases
the depolarization-induced and rebound bursts are significantly reduced in the presence of nickel (N ϭ 7).
Paralaminar cells with no apparent Ca burst continued to
ﬁre in a sustained fashion but with a slightly altered rate
(n ϭ 4; Fig. 9C).
Spike AHP. We also wanted to get some idea of the
nature of the paralaminar cell spike AHP. At millimolar
concentrations, 4AP blocks fast, voltage-sensitive K channels (IA) used to repolarize action potentials in TC cells in
other areas of the thalamus (Huguenard et al., 1991).
Bath application of 4AP also affected the repolarization of
the paralaminar cell action potentials (n ϭ 5 cells; Fig.
10). This resulted in the abolition of the fast component of
the AHP and a widening of the action potential (Fig. 10C).
MGM cells also appear to have a potassium conductance
not found in the MGV/MGD cell. Apamin blocks the smallconductance Ca2ϩ-activated Kϩ channel known as the SK
channel (see Castle et al., 1989). This drug had no apparent effect on the spike waveform and response features of
the MGB TC cells (Fig. 11A) but decreased the fast and
slow components of the paralaminar spike AHP and subsequently increased the ﬁring rate while maintaining
some spike frequency adaptation (n ϭ 4 cells; Fig. 11B). In
a paralaminar cell with a burst component, the burst
response was prolonged by apamin (n ϭ 2; Fig. 11C).

Comparison with intralaminar cells
Intralaminar nuclei are nuclear structures that lie
within the internal medullary lamina of the thalamus.
Several previously reported features of cells in the parafasicular nucleus (pf), a nucleus in the posterior intralaminar nuclear group, are unique compared with other areas
of the thalamus but are similar to those of paralaminar
cells (see Discussion). This led us to examine the basic
response properties of cells in the intralaminar nuclei to
see whether they too showed the unusual physiological
characteristics in vitro that we observed in paralaminar
cells. We recorded from and labeled a small sample (n ϭ
10) of cells in coronal or horizontal slices containing intralaminar nuclei including pf. Figure 12 illustrates examples of labeled cells in the pf nucleus. As we have
shown for many of our labeled paralaminar cells, these
cells showed long, sparsely branching dendrites (Fig. 12A,

326

P.H. SMITH ET AL.

Fig. 8. Comparison of responses in low calcium. A: Typical response of a tufted or stellate cell in the MGV or MGD to identical
depolarizing and hyperpolarizing current pulses in normal (top) and
low calcium (bottom) saline. Arrows highlight reduced Ca bursts in
low calcium. B: Response of a cell in a paralaminar nucleus to identical hyperpolarizing (top and bottom panels) or both depolarizing and
hyperpolarizing pulses (middle two panels) in normal and low-calcium
saline as the DC of the cell is moved from depolarized (top panel) to
hyperpolarized (bottom panel) levels. Polarizing pulses in normal and

low-calcium saline are superimposed on one another. Arrows indicate
a reduced calcium burst in the low-Ca saline. C: Response of a cell in
a paralaminar nucleus without a calcium burst to identical depolarizing current pulses in normal and low-calcium saline as the DC of the
cell is moved from depolarized (top panel) to hyperpolarized (bottom
panel) levels. Arrows indicate traces/spikes in low-calcium saline.
Scale bar ϭ 100 msec in B (applies to A,B). Time scale bar in C ϭ 100
msec. Voltage scale bar in C ϭ 20 mV and applies to all traces.

top left) that may or may not display dendritic spines.
Their axons could also give rise to local axon collaterals
(Fig. 12A, bottom left). Figure 12B–D illustrates the basic

response features of these cells. As described for cells in
the paralaminar nuclei, pf cells 1) can have action potentials with biphasic AHPs; 2) can ﬁre in a sustained, reg-

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF PARALAMINAR CELLS

327

Fig. 9. Comparison of responses in nickel. A: Typical response of a
tufted or stellate cell in the MGV or MGD to identical depolarizing
and hyperpolarizing current pulses in normal saline (top) and saline
containing 200 ␮m nickel (bottom). B: Response of a paralaminar cell
to identical depolarizing and hyperpolarizing current pulses in normal saline (top) and saline containing nickel (bottom). C: Response of

another paralaminar cell with no apparent calcium burst to identical
depolarizing and hyperpolarizing current pulses in normal saline
(top) and saline containing nickel (bottom). D: Response of another
paralaminar cell with a prolonged Ca burst to identical depolarizing
and hyperpolarizing current pulses in normal saline (top) and saline
containing nickel (bottom). Scale bars ϭ 100 msec, 20 mV.

ular fashion that can reach high rates with increasing
current strength (Fig. 12B) but can also show spike frequency adaptation (not shown); and 3) can have a reduced
calcium burst (not shown) or can show very little or no
calcium burst to depolarizing (Fig. 12C) or hyperpolarizing (Fig. 12D) current pulses regardless of the membrane
potential.

conﬁgurations and the dendritic branches had or lacked
spines. The axons of some cells, usually those with dendritic spines, gave off local axon collaterals, but not all
cells with dendritic spines did. Axons of cells labeled in
slices can be cut off fairly close to their origin on the cell
body or dendritic tree, so it is difﬁcult to know the actual
percentage of cells with local collaterals. We also occasionally labeled cells that could be classiﬁed as tufted, but the
number that could be unequivocally localized to a
paralaminar nucleus was low, and they were not included
in this report.
An interesting feature of some of our labeled paralaminar cells, perhaps related to their input selection, was
their long dendritic branches that could extend into neighboring paralaminar nuclei. Paralaminar nuclei receive in-

DISCUSSION
Anatomy
Our labeled cell population conﬁrms previous reports
that there is diversity in the pool of neurons in the MGM
and other paralaminar nuclei adjacent to the MGB. Cells
here had multipolar/stellate or elongate dendritic tree

328

Fig. 10. Responses of a paralaminar cell in 4AP. A: Responses to
depolarizing and hyperpolarizing pulses of a paralaminar cell that
had no signiﬁcant calcium burst. B: Responses of the same cell to
identical current pulses while in saline containing 2 mM 4AP. C: A
spike of the cell in normal saline superimposed on a spike while in
saline containing 2 mm 4AP. Scale bars ϭ 20 mV, 100 msec in A
(applies to A,B); 5 msec in C.

puts from several auditory and nonauditory areas. These
projections do not terminate uniformly over the entire
region. For example LeDoux et al. (1987) noted that auditory inputs from the inferior colliculus and somatosensory
inputs from spinal cord both innervate the paralaminar
nuclei but did not have a large area of overlap. Likewise,

P.H. SMITH ET AL.
Linke (1999) has shown that, although the paralaminar
nuclei are all innervated by inputs from both the inferior
and the superior colliculi, each paralaminar nucleus has
its own unique input pattern. Thus cells with more conﬁned dendrite trees (e.g., stellate/multipolar cells) might
be more restricted in what inputs could have an inﬂuence,
whereas elongate paralaminar cells, such as the ones illustrated in Figures 3–5, would not be subject to such
restrictions.
A second unique dendritic feature was the presence of a
fairly high concentration of dendritic spines on some of our
paralaminar cells but not on others. Spines have been
associated with certain forms of synaptic plasticity (Carlisle and Kennedy, 2005), and it is interesting that early
reports (Ryugo and Weinberger, 1978; Gerren and Weinberger, 1983) indicated that the MGM is a unique subdivision of MGB in that it is capable of showing plasticity
during classical conditioning paradigms. Both studies indicated that synapses of IC inputs onto MGM cells but not
onto MGV and MGD cells could show rapid, persistent
changes. More recent evidence again has implicated MGM
as part of a learning circuit. McEchron et al. (1996) used a
classical conditioning paradigm pairing auditory stimuli
with a corneal air puff. After training, stimulation of the
brachium of the IC but not superior colliculus generated
enhanced MGM responses for over 1 hour. Thus, synaptic
inputs to the MGM that are activated by the path carrying
auditory information to MGM neurons increased in
strength as the result of associative conditioning with an
acoustic stimulus. Future studies can test the hypothesis
that spiny, but not aspiny, paralaminar cells can show
lasting changes in synaptic strength.
Another potentially interesting feature of some of the
paralaminar cells was the presence of axon collaterals
that branched locally in the paralaminar nucleus containing the cell’s soma or in a nearby paralaminar nucleus
(Figs. 5, 6). These terminals are presumably excitatory.
We have preliminary physiological results showing that
electrical stimulation of inputs to the paralaminar nuclei
from IC, SC, and auditory cortex generate early, direct
synaptic events followed by longer latency, indirect excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs). These later events
may be generated by inputs from other activated MGM
cells with local collaterals. Similar stimulation of IC and
auditory cortex inputs to cells in MGD or MGV elicits
direct synaptic events but not longer latency EPSPs,
which correlates with the fact that the axons of stellate
and tufted cells never give off local collaterals and that the
MGM cell collaterals do not appear to stray into MGD or
MGV. Thus spike activity of a cell within a paralaminar
nucleus can have a direct excitatory effect on neighboring
paralaminar cells.
Numerous retrograde labeling studies (see, e.g., Ottersen and Ben-Ari, 1979; LeDoux et al., 1985, 1987, 1990;
Winer and Larue, 1987; Scheel, 1988; Roger and Arnault,
1989; Clerici and Coleman, 1990; Moriizumi amd Hattori,
1992; Brett et al., 1994; Shammah-Lagnado et al., 1996;
Doron and LeDoux, 1999; Linke, 1999; Linke et al., 1999;
Winer et al., 1999, 2002; Kimura et al., 2003) have shown
that cells in the paralaminar nuclei project to several
sites, including the cerebral cortex, amygdala, basal ganglia, and IC. Unfortunately, because of the incomplete
ﬁlling of cellular processes, none of these reports described
features of the dendritic trees or local axonal branching
pattern of the backﬁlled paralaminar cells, so we do not

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF PARALAMINAR CELLS
know whether any of the cell types reported here (stellate/
elongate, spines/no spines, axon collaterals/no collaterals)
project to a unique target.

Physiology
We have shown that cells in the MGM and adjacent
paralaminar nuclei have unusual basic response features
compared with reports of cells elsewhere in the thalamus.
The most striking feature was the reduction or apparent

329

lack of a low-threshold voltage-sensitive Ca conductance
in many cells. The vast majority of reports describing
recordings from thalamic cells include this conductance as
a regular feature of all thalamocortical neurons, and a
great deal of signiﬁcance has been assigned to its inﬂuence
on the output of the cell. The only region of the thalamus
where an apparent lack of this Ca conductance has been
reported is the ␥-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN). In vivo intracellular recordings from cells here (Contreras et al., 1992) were
classiﬁed as type I or II based on the ability (type I) or lack
thereof (type II) to generate a high-frequency burst of
spikes. Subsequent in vitro recordings (Brunton and
Charpak, 1997) showed a lack or reduction of the lowthreshold Ca conductance in the type II TRN neurons and,
as with our paralaminar cells, sustained regular ﬁring to
suprathreshold currents at all membrane potentials. The
only other report of cells in the thalamus whose basic
intrinsic physiology differs somewhat from the norm is a
report from Li et al. (2003) on cells in the rat lateral
posterior nucleus (LPN), a “higher order” visual thalamic
nucleus. Unlike our paralaminar cells, LPN cells showed
the typical thalamocortical cell morphology, and all displayed the low-threshold calcium conductance. However,
unlike the standard TC cell in “ﬁrst-order thalamic nuclei,” some cells had a “regular spiking” mode and shortduration action potentials with biphasic AHPs similar to
those seen in many of our paralaminar cells. The authors
also noted some cells that displayed a “clustered spiking,”
deﬁned as a ﬁring mode in which depolarizing current
elicited epochs of high-frequency bursts of ﬁring not
caused by the low-threshold Ca conductance. We have also
seen cases of this “clustered spiking” response type in the
paralaminar nuclei but do not yet have a large enough
sample of labeled, positively identiﬁed cells to report any
details with conﬁdence.

Paralaminar vs. intralaminar cells
Intralaminar nuclei are nuclear structures that lie
within the internal medullary lamina of the thalamus. It
has been suggested that cells in one of the posterior intralaminar nuclei, the pf, supply the striatum with information about behaviorally signiﬁcant sensory events,
which it uses to help modulate the animal’s motor response (see, e.g., Van der Werf et al., 2002; Smith et al.,
2004). We recorded from and labeled a small population of

Fig. 11. Comparison of responses in apamin. A: Left side: Typical
response of a tufted or stellate cell in the MGV or MGD to identical
depolarizing and hyperpolarizing current pulses in normal (top) and
saline containing 20 nM apamin (bottom). Right side: Superimposed
onset (top) and rebound (bottom) bursts in normal and saline containing apamin showing no change. B: Left side: Response of a paralaminar cell that had no calcium burst to identical depolarizing and
hyperpolarizing current pulses in normal (top) and saline containing
apamin (bottom). Right side: Superimposed responses at the onset of
the depolarization in normal and saline containing apamin. C: Left
side: Response of a paralaminar cell that had a calcium burst to
identical depolarizing and hyperpolarizing current pulses in normal
(top) and saline containing apamin (bottom). Right side: Onset (top,
traces offset from one another) and rebound (bottom, responses superimposed) responses in normal and saline containing apamin. Voltage scale bar ϭ 20 mV. Time scale bar in A ϭ 100 msec and applies to
left column in A, B and C. Scale bar in right column in A ϭ 10 msec
(applies to all traces in right column).

Fig. 12. Cell in the parafascicular nucleus. A: Top left: Camera
lucida drawing of the cell body, dendritic tree, and axon. Bottom left:
Drawing of the cell body, main axon, and axon collaterals of the same cell
with the dendrites removed. Right: Location of the cell (asterisk) in the
parafascicular nucleus. B: Response of the cell shown in A to current
pulses of increasing current strength (top to bottom). C: Response of the
same cell to suprathreshold depolarizing current pulses as the cell was
held at different membrane potentials. D: Response of the same cell to

hyperpolarizing current pulses as the cell was held at different membrane potentials. APT, anterior pretectal nucleus; cp, cerebral peduncle;
DLG, dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus; fr, fasciculus retroﬂexus; hbc,
habenular commissure; ic, internal capsule; PF, parafascicular thalamic
nucleus; SNR, substantia nigra pars reticulata; VLG, ventral lateral
geniculate nucleus; 3V, third ventricle. Scale bars ϭ 100 ␮m in A at left;
1 mm at right; 20 mV, 100 msec in B (applies to B–D).

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF PARALAMINAR CELLS
pf cells. This was motivated by previous reports describing
features of cells in the rat pf and paralaminar nuclei that
were similar. First, cells in both pf and paralaminar nuclei
can project to the striatum (Herkeham, 1980; LeDoux et
al., 1985; Feger et al., 1994; Deschenes et al., 1996; Vercelli et al., 2003; Castle et al., 2005). LeDoux et al. (1985)
noted that retrogradely labeled cells from the caudateputamen formed a continuous stream of cells running
from paralaminar nuclei rostromedially into the posterior
intralaminar nuclei. Second, in vivo recordings from pf
and paralaminar nuclei showed that cells can be multimodal, responding to auditory and somatosensory stimuli
with responses that rapidly adapt to repeated auditory
stimuli (Bordi and LeDoux, 1994a,b; Matsumoto et al.,
2001). Third, work by Scheibel and Scheibel (1967) and
Deschenes et al. (1996) described “nonspeciﬁc” neurons in
the intralaminar nuclei that were “reticular-like” with
long, scarcely ramifying spine bearing dendrites and axons that gave off locally ramifying axon collaterals. Descheˆnes et al. (1996) speculated that these reticular-like
intralaminar cells with an anatomy that differed so drastically from the stereotypical TC cell in relay nuclei could
also differ in their physiology. All of these observations
motivated us to record from pf cells in vitro, and we noted
similarities in our pf and paralaminar cells. As with
paralaminar cells, pf cells could lack or have a reduced
low-threshold calcium conductance and could show regular, sustained ﬁring and action potentials with biphasic
AHPs. In agreement with previous descriptions, these
cells also resembled the elongate paralaminar cells with
their long, sparsely branching dendrites, which may or
may not be spiny, and their axons, which may display local
collateral branches. We propose, based on these similarities, that at least some of our elongate paralaminar cells
could be thalamostriatal or at least integrate and transmit
synaptic inputs in a similar fashion.

Burst function
To begin to try to interpret why bursts are reduced or
absent in paralaminar cells, it might be helpful ﬁrst to
understand their function in areas of the thalamus where
they are ubiquitous. In the visual thalamus, thalamocortical neuron bursts have been postulated to be involved in
the generation of synchronized sleep rhythms (Livingstone and Hubel, 1981; Steriade et al., 1993). More recent
ﬁndings that cells in the visual thalamus of the alert,
awake cat also respond in a burst fashion (Guido and
Weyand, 1995; Reinagel et al., 1999; Weyland et al., 2001;
Lesica and Stanley, 2004) have dampened enthusiasm for
this idea. The current thinking is that cells in burst mode
are better able to detect near-threshold visual stimuli (see
Sherman, 2001). Another observation that may be relevant to thalamic burst function in the visual system was
made by Swadlow and Gusev (2003), who noted that a
spike burst was more efﬁcient at eliciting a spike in a
cortical neuron receiving this input.
There is less information regarding the function of the
bursting response in the auditory thalamus in vivo. Yu et
al. (2004) recorded intracellularly from cells in the guinea
pig MGB. By using current injection, they changed the
membrane potential of cells and showed that the driven
response to an auditory stimulus could change from burst
to tonic ﬁring modes. The burst ﬁring response occurred at
hyperpolarized levels and was almost certainly due to the
low-threshold calcium conductance. Unfortunately, they

331

did not report the MGN location of the cells that illustrated this membrane potential-dependent response
change. Other extracellular recording studies (He and Hu,
2002; Massaux et al., 2004) found that the proportion of
burst ﬁring varied depending on the animal’s state and
the electrode location and that bursts were detected in
awake, anesthetized or sleeping animals, during spontaneous or sound-driven responses and in all areas of the
MGB (including MGM). Massaux et al. (2004) noted that,
in awake guinea pigs, the burst component of responses to
tones occurred preferentially at or around the cell’s best
frequency and that response latency and variability of the
response latency were both reduced for the bursts. This
would indicate that the burst response might give a more
selective and accurate representation of sound frequency
to postsynaptic targets. All of this would provide very
indirect evidence that paralaminar cells lacking bursts
might be less likely to respond synchronously as a group
or respond to near-threshold stimuli and less likely to
have narrow, more reﬁned response areas or to activate
their postsynaptic target with a high degree of reliability.
Another way of attempting to determine why bursts are
reduced or absent in MGM cells would be to try to relate
how such cells might be better able to perform their proposed function. One set of paralaminar cells, those that
project to the amygdala, is part of the pathway responsible
for the behavioral and autonomic events elicited by the
conditioned fear response (LeDoux et al., 1988; LeDoux,
1995; LeDoux and Muller, 1997). LeDoux and colleagues
noted that, within this pathway, long-term potentiation
(LTP)-like associative processes occur during fear conditioning and may underlie the long-term associative plasticity that constitutes memory of the conditioning experience. Lesion, tracer, and recording experiments have
shown that paralaminar nuclei are the interface between
the anterolateral amygdala (AL) and the ascending auditory system (LeDoux et al., 1986, 1990a,b; Clugnet et al.,
1990). Further experiments documented that amygdalar
responses to auditory inputs are enhanced by electrical
stimulation speciﬁcally applied to the medial MGB or by
prior conditioning of the auditory stimulus (Clugnet and
LeDoux, 1990; Rogan and LeDoux, 1995; Quirk et al.,
1995). It should be noted that the electrical stimuli used
by Clugnet and LeDoux to induce LTP were trains of 30
pulses at 400 Hz. Cells in a calcium burst mode could not
follow such a rapid stimulus given the long refractory
period (around 200 msec) of the underlying conductance
(Jahnsen and Llinas, 1984a). Cells with no burst and an
ability to respond steadily at high rates (see Fig. 7A) could
follow such a stimulus.
Another function of the paralaminar nuclei is to activate
40-Hz oscillations in the auditory cortex. Human studies
(Llinas and Ribary, 1993; Joliot et al., 1994) showed that
40-Hz oscillations could reﬂect cognitive processing of auditory stimuli and the “temporal binding” of sensory stimuli into a single experience. Temporal binding refers to the
conscious binding together of sensory events that occur
during a particular time as a single experience, and the
40-Hz oscillation is “required” for this to occur. Barth and
McDonald (1996) reported that gamma oscillations occurred spontaneously or could be evoked in auditory cortex by auditory stimuli. They further showed that auditory thalamus could modulate these oscillations.
Electrically stimulating of MGV or MGD inhibited the
40-Hz cortical response, whereas stimulation of the me-

332

P.H. SMITH ET AL.

dial aspect of the auditory thalamus elicited it. The ﬁnding suggests a functional role for MGM in cognition.
Again, in these experiments, the electrical stimulation
used to evoke the cortical 40-Hz oscillations was at a high
rate (500 msec duration at 500 Hz), which could not be
followed by cells in bursting mode but might be by cells
capable of high sustained ﬁring.

Apamin-sensitive conductance
We have shown that some paralaminar cells possess
the apamin-sensitive SK-type calcium-activated K
channel, whereas TC cells in the MGV and MGD do not.
We also showed that the SK channel is controlling some
aspects of the ﬁring properties of the paralaminar cells.
Blocking the channel had little or no effect on the MGV/
MGD spike response (see Fig. 11A) but prolonged the
spike response of paralaminar cells that did possess a
Ca burst (Fig. 11B) and increased ﬁring frequency of a
paralaminar cell that did not show a calcium burst (Fig.
11C). One of the SK channel proteins is highly expressed in the thalamic reticular nucleus (Sailer et al.,
2002), where channel blockade by apamin affected neuronal excitability (Bal and McCormick, 1993, Debarbieux et al., 1998), so both TRN and paralaminar cells
seem to possess this channel. Another observation on
the TRN SK channel is that it was affected by the
intravenous anesthetic propofol (Ying and Goldstein,
2005). Propofol also blocks auditory evoked focal gamma
band oscillations (40-Hz oscillatory electrical activity)
in auditory cortex, and stimulation of either the TRN
(Macdonald et al., 1998) or the medial division of the
MGB (Barth and MacDonald, 1996) elicits this 40-Hz
cortical oscillation. Perhaps the auditory TRN, its connection to the MGM, and the MGM projection to cortex
are important components of the 40-Hz activation circuitry and the propofol effect on the SK channel at one
or both locations explains its effect on the oscillation.
Recently, the SK channel has also been implicated in
LTP. Faber et al. (2005) showed that activation of glutamatergic synapses in the amygdala caused calcium
inﬂux through N-methyl-D-aspartate channels that activated SK channels and shunted the EPSP. Apamin
blockade of this channel allowed synaptic events to
summate and generate an enhanced LTP. It is interesting to note that at least some MGM cells express the
SK channel and that this is the only part of the MGB
where potentiation of synaptic events has been found
(Ryugo and Weinberger, 1978; Gerren and Weinberger,
1983; McEchron et al., 1996). Thus, just as low-voltage
Ca channels can act as “sensory gates” in ﬁrst-order TC
neurons, the SK channels in some paralaminar cells
may act as a “learning gate.”
In conclusion, some cells in MGM and surrounding
paralaminar nuclei have been shown to possess unique
features distinguishing them from the majority of other
cells in the dorsal thalamus but linking them with cells in
intralaminar thalamic nuclei (and the thalamic reticular
nucleus). It will be of great interest to determine which of
the various cells in the paralaminar nuclei surrounding
the medial geniculate nuclei project to their target structures and how these unique anatomical and physiological
features that we have described here aid them in the
completion of their tasks.

LITERATURE CITED
Aghajanian GK, Rasmussen K. 1989. Intracellular studies in the facial
nucleus illustrating a simple new method for obtaining viable motoneurons in adult rat brain slices. Synapse 3:331–338.
Arnault P, Roger M. 1987. The connections of the peripeduncular area
studied by retrograde and anterograde transport in the rat. J Comp
Neurol 258:463– 476.
Arnault P, Roger M. 1990. Ventral temporal cortex in the rat: connections
of secondary auditory areas Te2 and Te3. J Comp Neurol 302:110 –123.
Bal T, McCormick DA. 1993. Mechanisms of oscillatory activity in guineapig nucleus reticularis thalami in vitro: a mammalian pacemaker.
J Physiol 468:669 – 691.
Barth DS, MacDonald KD. 1996. Thalamic modulation of high-frequency
oscillating potentials in auditory cortex. Nature 383:78 – 81.
Bartlett EL, Smith PH. 1999. Anatomical, intrinsic, and synaptic properties of dorsal and ventral division neurons in the rat medial geniculate
body. J Neurophysiol 81:1999 –2006.
Bartlett EL, Smith PH. 2002. Effects of paired-pulse and repetitive stimulation of inferior colliculus axons on thalamocortical neurons in the
rat medial geniculate body. Neuroscience 113:957–974.
Benedek G, Pereny J, Kovacs G, Fischer-Szatmari L, Katoh YY. 1997.
Visual, somatosensory, auditory and nociceptive modality properties in
the feline suprageniculate nucleus. Neuroscience 78:179 –189.
Bordi F, LeDoux JE. 1994a. Response properties of single units in areas of
rat auditory thalamus that project to the amygdala. I. Acoustic discharge patterns and frequency receptive ﬁelds. Exp Brain Res 98:261–
274.
Bordi F, LeDoux JE. 1994b. Response properties of single units in areas of
rat auditory thalamus that project to the amygdala. II. Cells receiving
convergent auditory and somatosensory inputs and cells antidromically activated by amygdala stimulation. Exp Brain Res 98:275–286.
Brett B, Di S, Watkins L, Barth DS. 1994. A horseradish peroxidase study
of parallel thalamocortical projections responsible for the generation of
mid-latency auditory-evoked potentials. Brain Res 647:65–75.
Brunton J, Charpak S. 1997. Heterogeneity of cell ﬁring properties and
opioid sensitivity in the thalamic reticular nucleus. Neuroscience 78:
303–307.
Carlisle HJ. Kennedy MB. 2005. Spine architecture and synaptic plasticity. Trends Neurosci 28:182–187.
Castle NA, Haylett DG, Jenkinson DH. 1989. Toxins in the characterization of potassium channels. Trends Neurosci 12:59 – 65.
Castle M, Aymerich MS, Sanchez-Escobar C, Gonzalo N, Obeso JA, Lanciego JL. 2005. Thalamic innervation of the direct and indirect basal
ganglia pathways in the rat: ipsi- and contralateral projections. J Comp
Neurol 483:143–153.
Clerici WJ, Coleman JR. 1990. Anatomy of the rat medial geniculate body:
I. Cytoarchitecture, myeloarchitecture, and neocortical connectivity.
J Comp Neurol 297:14 –31.
Clerici WJ, McDonald AJ, Thompson R, Coleman JR. 1990. Anatomy of the
rat medial geniculate body: II. Dendritic morphology. J Comp Neurol
297:32–54.
Clugnet MC, LeDoux JE, Morrison SF. 1990. Unit responses evoked in the
amygdala and striatum by electrical stimulation of the medial geniculate body. J Neurosci 10:1055–1061.
Contreras D, Curro Dossi R, Steriade M. 1992. Bursting and tonic discharges in two classes of reticular thalamic neurons. J Neurophysiol
68:973–977.
Debarbieux F, Brunton J, Charpak S. 1998. Effect of bicuculline on thalamic activity: a direct blockade of IAHP in reticularis neurons. J Neurophysiol 79:2911–2918.
Descheˆnes M, Bourassa J, Doan VD, Parent A. 1996. A single-cell study of
the axonal projections arising from the posterior intralaminar thalamic
nuclei in the rat. Eur J Neurosci 8:329 –343.
Doron NN, LeDoux JE. 1999. Organization of projections to the lateral
amygdala from auditory and visual areas of the thalamus in the rat.
J Comp Neurol 412:383– 409.
Doron NN, LeDoux JE. 2000. Cells in the posterior thalamus project to
both amygdala and temporal cortex: a quantitative retrograde doublelabeling study in the rat. J Comp Neurol 425:257–274.
Feger J, Bevan M, Crossman AR. 1994. The projections from the parafascicular thalamic nucleus to the subthalamic nucleus and the striatum
arise from separate neuronal populations: a comparison with the corticostriatal and corticosubthalamic efferents in a retrograde ﬂuorescent double-labelling study. Neuroscience 60:125–132.

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF PARALAMINAR CELLS
Gerren RA, Weinberger NM. 1983. Long term potentiation in the magnocellular medial geniculate nucleus of the anesthetized cat. Brain Res
265:138 –142.
Guido W, Weyand T. 1995. Burst responses in thalamic relay cells of the
awake behaving cat. J Neurophysiol 74:1782–1786.
He J, Hu B. 2002. Differential distribution of burst and single-spike responses in auditory thalamus. J Neurophysiol 88:2152–2156.
Herkenham M. 1980. Laminar organization of thalamic projections to the
rat neocortex. Science 207:532–535.
Hernandez-Cruz A, Pape HC. 1989. Identiﬁcation of two calcium currents
in acutely dissociated neurons from the rat lateral geniculate nucleus.
J Neurophysiol 61:1270 –1283.
Hicks TP, Stark CA, Fletcher WA. 1986. Origins of afferents to visual
suprageniculate nucleus of the cat. J Comp Neurol 246:544 –554.
Hu B. 1995. Cellular basis of temporal synaptic signaling: an in vitro
electrophysiological study in rat auditory thalamus. J Physiol 483:167–
182.
Huguenard JR, Coulter DA, Prince DA. 1991. A fast transient potassium
current in thalamic relay neurons: kinetics of activation and inactivation. J Neurophysiol 66:1304 –1315.
Jahnsen H, Llinas R. 1984a. Voltage-dependent burst-to-tonic switching of
thalamic cell activity: an in vitro study. Arch Ital Biol 122:73– 82.
Jahnsen H, Llinas R. 1984b. Electrophysiological properties of guinea-pig
thalamic neurones: an in vitro study. J Physiol 349:205–226.
Joliet M, Ribary U, Llinas R. 1994. Human oscillatory brain activity near
40 Hz coexists with cognitive temporal binding. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 91:11748 –11751.
Jones EG. 1998a. A new view of speciﬁc and nonspeciﬁc thalamocortical
connections. Adv Neurol 77:49 –71.
Jones EG. 1998b. Viewpoint: the core and matrix of thalamic organization.
Neuroscience 85:331–345.
Kharazia VN, Weinberg RJ. 1994. Glutamate in thalamic ﬁbers terminating in layer IV of primary sensory cortex. J Neurosci 14:6021– 6032.
Kimura A, Donishi T, Sakoda T, Hazama M, Tamai Y. 2003. Auditory
thalamic nuclei projections to the temporal cortex in the rat. Neuroscience 117:1003–1016.
LeDoux JE. 1995. Emotion: clues from the brain. Annu Rev Psychol 46:
209 –235.
LeDoux JE, Muller J. 1997. Emotional memory and psychopathology.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 352:1719 –1726.
LeDoux JE, Iwata J, Cicchetti P, Reis DJ. 1988. Different projections of the
central amygdaloid nucleus mediate autonomic and behavioral correlates of conditioned fear. J Neurosci 8:2517–2529.
LeDoux JE, Sakaguchi A, Reis DJ. 1984. Subcortical efferent projections of
the medial geniculate nucleus mediate emotional responses conditioned to acoustic stimuli. J Neurosci 4:683– 698.
LeDoux JE, Ruggiero DA, Reis DJ. 1985. Projections to the subcortical
forebrain from anatomically deﬁned regions of the medial geniculate
body in the rat. J Comp Neurol 242:182–213.
LeDoux JE, Iwata J, Cicchetti P, Reis DJ. 1986. Different projections of the
central amygdaloid nucleus mediate autonomic and behavioral correlates of conditioned fear. J Neurosci 8:2517–2529.
LeDoux JE, Ruggiero DA, Forest R, Stornetta R, Reis DJ. 1987. Topographic organization of convergent projections to the thalamus from
the inferior colliculus and spinal cord in the rat. J Comp Neurol 264:
123–146.
Lesica NA, Stanley GB. 2004. Encoding of natural scene movies by tonic
and burst spikes in the lateral geniculate nucleus. J Neurosci 24:
10731–10740.
Li J, Bickford ME, Guido W. 2003. Distinct ﬁring properties of higher order
thalamic relay neurons. J Neurophysiol 90:291–299.
Linke R. 1999. Organization of projections to temporal cortex originating in
the thalamic posterior intralaminar nucleus of the rat. Exp Brain Res
127:314 –320.
Linke R, Schwegler H. 2000. Convergent and complementary projections of
the caudal paralaminar thalamic nuclei to rat temporal and insular
cortex. Cereb Cortex 10:753–771.
Linke R, De Lima AD, Schwegler H, Pape HC. 1999. Direct synaptic
connections of axons from superior colliculus with identiﬁed thalamoamygdaloid projection neurons in the rat: possible substrates of a
subcortical visual pathway to the amygdala. J Comp Neurol 403:158 –
170.
Linke R, Braune G, Schwegler H. 2000. Differential projection of the

333

posterior paralaminar thalamic nuclei to the amygdaloid complex in
the rat. Exp Brain Res 134:520 –532.
Linke R, Faber-Zuschratter H, Seidenbecher T, Pape HC. 2004. Axonal
connections from posterior paralaminar thalamic neurons to basomedial amygdaloid projection neurons to the lateral entorhinal cortex in
rats. Brain Res Bull 63:461– 469.
Livingstone MS, Hubel DH. 1993. Effects of sleep and arousal on the
processing of visual information in the cat. Nature 291:554 –561.
Llinas R, Ribary U. 1993. Coherent 40-Hz oscillation characterizes dream
state in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90:2078 –2081.
Macdonald KD, Fifkova E, Jones MS, Barth DS. 1998. Focal stimulation of
the thalamic reticular nucleus induces focal gamma waves in cortex.
J Neurophysiol 79:474 – 477.
Massaux A, Dutrieux G, Cotillon-Williams N, Manunta Y, Edeline JM.
2004. Auditory thalamus bursts in anesthetized and non-anesthetized
states: contribution to functional properties. J Neurophysiol 91:2117–
2134.
Matsumoto N, Minamimoto T, Graybiel AM, Kimura M. 2001. Neurons in
the thalamic CM-Pf complex supply striatal neurons with information
about behaviorally signiﬁcant sensory events. J Neurophysiol 85:960 –
976.
McEchron MD, Green EJ, Winters RW, Nolen TG, Schneiderman N, McCabe PM. 1996. Changes of synaptic efﬁcacy in the medial geniculate
nucleus as a result of auditory classical conditioning. J Neurosci 16:
1273–1283.
McMullen NT, de Venecia RK. 1993. Thalamocortical patches in auditory
neocortex. Brain Res 620:317–322.
Mitani A, Itoh K, Nomura S, Kudo M, Kaneko T, Mizuno N. 1984.
Thalamocortical projections to layer I of the primary auditory cortex in
the cat: a horseradish peroxidase study. Brain Res 310:347–350.
Mitani A, Itoh K, Mizuno N. 1987. Distribution and size of thalamic
neurons projecting to layer I of the auditory cortical ﬁelds of the cat
compared with those projecting to layer IV. J Comp Neurol 257:105–
121.
Morest DK. 1964. The neuronal architecture of the medial geniculate body
of the cat. J Anat 98:611– 630.
Moriizumi T, Hattori T. 1992. Ultrastructural morphology of projections
from the medial geniculate nucleus and its adjacent region to the basal
ganglia. Brain Res Bull 29:193–198.
Niimi K, Matsuoka H. 1979. Thalamocortical organization of the auditory
system in the cat studied by retrograde axonal transport of horseradish
peroxidase. Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol 57:1–56.
Ottersen OP, Ben-Ari Y. 1979. Afferent connections to the amygdaloid
complex of the rat and cat. I. Projections from the thalamus. J Comp
Neurol 187:401– 424.
Pape HC, McCormick DA. 1995. Electrophysiological and pharmacological
properties of interneurons in the cat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus.
Neuroscience 68:1105–1125.
Paxino G, Watson C. 1986. The rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates. London: Academic Press.
Peschanski M. 1984. Trigeminal afferents to the diencephalon in the rat.
Neuroscience 12:465– 487.
Peruzzi D, Bartlett E, Smith PH, Oliver DL. 1997. A monosynaptic
GABAergic input from the inferior colliculus to the medial geniculate
body in the rat. J Neurosci 17:3766 –3777.
Plourde G. 1996. The effects of propofol on the 40-Hz auditory steady-state
response and on the electroencephalogram in humans. Anesth Analg
82:1015–1022.
Quirk GJ, Repa C, LeDoux JE. 1995. Fear conditioning enhances shortlatency auditory responses of lateral amygdala neurons: parallel recordings in the freely behaving rat. Neuron 15:1029 –1039.
Reinagel P, Godwin D, Sherman SM, Koch C. 1999. Encoding of visual
information by LGN bursts. J Neurophysiol 81:2558 –2569.
Rogan MT, LeDoux JE. 1995. LTP is accompanied by commensurate enhancement of auditory-evoked responses in a fear conditioning circuit.
Neuron 15:127–136.
Roger M, Arnault P. 1989. Anatomical study of the connections of the
primary auditory area in the rat. J Comp Neurol 287:339 –356.
Ryugo DK, Weinberger NM. 1978. Differential plasticity of morphologically distinct neuron populations in the medical geniculate body of the
cat during classical conditioning. Behav Biol 22:275–301.
Sailer CA, Hu H, Kaufmann WA, Trieb M, Schwarzer C, Storm JF, Knaus
HG. 2002. Regional differences in distribution and functional expres-

334
sion of small-conductance Ca2ϩ-activated Kϩ channels in rat brain.
J Neurosci 22:9698 –9707.
Scheel M. 1988. Topographic organization of the auditory thalamocortical
system in the albino rat. Anat Embryol 179:181–190.
Scheibel ME, Scheibel AB. 1967. Structural organization of nonspeciﬁc
thalamic nuclei and their projection toward cortex. Brain Res 6:60 –94.
Senatorov VV, Hu B. 2002. Extracortical descending projections to the rat
inferior colliculus. Neuroscience 115:243–250.
Shammah-Lagnado SJ, Alheid GF, Heimer L. 1996. Efferent connections of
the caudal part of the globus pallidus in the rat. J Comp Neurol
376:489 –507.
Sherman SM. 2001. Tonic and burst ﬁring: dual modes of thalamocortical
relay. Trends Neurosci. 24:122–126.
Sherman SM, Guillery RW. 2001. Exploring the thalamus. London: Academic Press.
Smith Y, Raju DV, Pare JF, Sidibe M. 2004. The thalamostriatal system: a
highly speciﬁc network of the basal ganglia circuitry. Trends Neurosci
27:520 –527.
Steriade M, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ. 1993. Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused brain. Science 262:679 – 685.
Swadlow HA, Gusev AG. 2001. The impact of “bursting” thalamic impulses
at a neocortical synapse. Nat Neurosci 4:402– 408.
Sukov W, Barth DS. 2001. Cellular mechanisms of thalamically evoked
gamma oscillations in auditory cortex. J Neurophysiol 85:1235–1245.
Tennigkeit F, Puil E, Schwarz DW. 1997. Firing modes and membrane
properties in lemniscal auditory thalamus. Acta Otolaryngol 117:254 –
257.
Van der Werf YD, Witter MP, Groenewegen HJ. 2002. The intralaminar
and midline nuclei of the thalamus. Anatomical and functional evidence for participation in processes of arousal and awareness. Brain
Res Brain Res Rev 39:107–140.
Vercelli A, Marini G, Tredici G. 2003. Anatomical organization of the

P.H. SMITH ET AL.
telencephalic connections of the parafascicular nucleus in adult and
developing rats. Eur J Neurosci 18:275–289.
Weinberger NM. 1998. Physiological memory in primary auditory cortex:
characteristics and mechanisms. Neurobiol Learn Mem 70:226 –251.
Weinberger NM, Javid R, Lepan B. 1995. Heterosynaptic long-term facilitation of sensory-evoked responses in the auditory cortex by stimulation of the magnocellular medial geniculate body in guinea pigs. Behav
Neurosci 109:10 –17.
Weyand TG, Boudreaux M, Guido W. 2001. Burst and tonic response
modes in thalamic neurons during sleep and wakefulness. J Neurophysiol 85:1107–1118.
Winer JA, Larue DT. 1987. Patterns of reciprocity in auditory thalamocortical and corticothalamic connections: study with horseradish peroxidase and autoradiographic methods in the rat medial geniculate body.
J Comp Neurol 257:282–315.
Winer JA, Larue DT. 1988. Anatomy of glutamic acid decarboxylase immunoreactive neurons and axons in the rat medial geniculate body.
J Comp Neurol 278:47– 68.
Winer JA, Morest DK. 1983. The medial division of the medial geniculate
body of the cat: implications for thalamic organization. J Neurosci
3:2629 –2651.
Winer JA, Kelly JB, Larue DT. 1999. Neural architecture of the rat medial
geniculate body. Hearing Res 130:19 – 41.
Winer JA, Chernock ML, Larue DT, Cheung SW. 2002. Descending projections to the inferior colliculus from the posterior thalamus and the
auditory cortex in rat, cat, and monkey. Hearing Res 168:181–195.
Ying SW, Goldstein PA. 2005. Propofol-block of SK channels in reticular
thalamic neurons enhances GABAergic inhibition in relay neurons.
J. Neurophysiol 93:1935–1948.
Yu YQ, Xiong Y, Chan YS, He J. 2004. In vivo intracellular responses of the
medial geniculate neurones to acoustic stimuli in anaesthetized guinea
pigs. J Physiol 560:191–205.

