Physiol Rev
83: 1401–1453, 2003; 10.1152/physrev.00012.2003.

Interactions Between Membrane Conductances
Underlying Thalamocortical Slow-Wave Oscillations
A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI
Unite´ de Neurosciences Inte´gratives et Computationnelles, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Gif-sur-Yvette, France; Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Salk Institute; Department of Biology,
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California

1402
1402
1402
1402
1403

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

I. Introduction
A. Brain rhythms
B. The building blocks of EEG rhythms
C. Interaction between intrinsic and synaptic conductances
D. Thalamocortical loops
II. Single-Cell Pacemakers: Oscillations and Bursts Emerging From the Interplay of Intrinsic
Conductances in Single Neurons
A. Thalamic relay cells
B. Thalamic reticular neurons
III. Network Pacemakers: Oscillations That Depend on Both Intrinsic and Synaptic Conductances
A. Experimental characterization of thalamic oscillations
B. Models of the thalamic reticular pacemaker
C. Models of the TC-RE pacemaker
D. Reconciling different pacemaker mechanisms
IV. Thalamocortical Pacemakers: Control and Synchronization of Oscillations
From Interacting Networks
A. The large-scale synchrony of slow-wave oscillations
B. Pathological behavior: absence seizures
C. Computational roles of synchronized oscillations
V. Summary and Conclusions
A. A framework for thalamic and thalamocortical oscillations
B. Successful, unsuccessful, and untested predictions
C. Concluding remarks

1404
1404
1409
1412
1412
1414
1417
1420
1422
1422
1427
1435
1440
1440
1441
1444

Destexhe, A., and T. J. Sejnowski. Interactions Between Membrane Conductances Underlying Thalamocortical Slow-Wave Oscillations. Physiol Rev 83: 1401–1453, 2003; 10.1152/physrev.00012.2003.—Neurons of the
central nervous system display a broad spectrum of intrinsic electrophysiological properties that are absent in
the traditional “integrate-and-fire” model. A network of neurons with these properties interacting through
synaptic receptors with many time scales can produce complex patterns of activity that cannot be intuitively
predicted. Computational methods, tightly linked to experimental data, provide insights into the dynamics of
neural networks. We review this approach for the case of bursting neurons of the thalamus, with a focus on
thalamic and thalamocortical slow-wave oscillations. At the single-cell level, intrinsic bursting or oscillations
can be explained by interactions between calcium- and voltage-dependent channels. At the network level, the
genesis of oscillations, their initiation, propagation, termination, and large-scale synchrony can be explained by
interactions between neurons with a variety of intrinsic cellular properties through different types of synaptic
receptors. These interactions can be altered by neuromodulators, which can dramatically shift the large-scale
behavior of the network, and can also be disrupted in many ways, resulting in pathological patterns of activity,
such as seizures. We suggest a coherent framework that accounts for a large body of experimental data at the
ion-channel, single-cell, and network levels. This framework suggests physiological roles for the highly
synchronized oscillations of slow-wave sleep.
www.prv.org

0031-9333/03 $15.00 Copyright © 2003 the American Physiological Society

1401

1402

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

I. INTRODUCTION
A. Brain Rhythms

C. Interaction Between Intrinsic
and Synaptic Conductances

B. The Building Blocks of EEG Rhythms
The earliest explanation for the EEG rhythmicity was
the “circus movement theory” proposed by Rothberger in
1931 (cited in Ref. 38). According to this theory, the
rhythms are due to action potentials traveling along
chains of interconnected neurons. The period of the
rhythmicity corresponded to the time needed for a volley
of action potentials to traverse a loop in the chain. Inspired by the circus movement theory, Bishop (28) proposed the concept of “thalamocortical reverberating circuits,” in which the rhythmicity was generated by action
potentials traveling back and forth between thalamus and
cortex. Although the reverberating circuit theory remained prevalent for several years, subsequent experiments demonstrated that the EEG activity is not generated by action potentials (260), invalidating a fundamental
premise of the circus movement theory.
An alternative proposal by Bremer (38 – 40) suggested instead that brain rhythms reflect the autorhythmic
properties of cortical neurons and that the EEG is generated by nonpropagated potentials, in analogy with the
electrotonic potentials in the spinal cord (33). Bremer
(39) also proposed that cortical oscillations should depend on the “excitability cycle” of cortical neurons. He

Physiol Rev • VOL

Spinal motoneurons integrate synaptic activity and,
when a threshold membrane potential is reached, emit an
action potential that is followed by a prolonged hyperpolarization (43, 110). This led to an early model of the
neuron based on the concept of “integrate and fire” followed by a reset. Early views about activity in other parts
of the central nervous system, particularly the cerebral
cortex, were strongly influenced by studies of motoneurons, and brain activity was thought to arise by interactions between similar neurons connected in different
ways. In this “connectionist” view, the function of a brain
area was determined primarily by its pattern of connectivity (110).
Studies on invertebrates during the 1970s revealed
that neurons are endowed with complex intrinsic firing
properties that depart from the traditional integrate-andfire model (2, 55–57, 176). Further evidence against the
integrate-and-fire view came from studies of small invertebrate ganglia showing that connectivity was insufficient
by itself to specify function (126, 274) and that the modulation of intrinsic properties needed to be taken into
account (146). The generality of these results was con-

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

The rhythmic nature of electrical activity in the brain
was first discovered in electroencephalographic (EEG)
recordings from the scalp by Caton in 1875, and later by
Berger in humans (25). They observed that the frequency
and amplitude of the oscillations vary widely across different behavioral states. Awake and attentive states are
characterized by low-amplitude, high-frequency EEG activity, with significant power in the beta (20 –30 Hz) and
gamma (30 – 80 Hz) frequency bands. Large-amplitude alpha rhythms (8 –12 Hz) appear mostly in occipital cortex
in aroused states with eyes closed and are reduced with
eyes open (25). The early stages of sleep are characterized
by spindle waves (7–14 Hz), which consist of short bursts
of oscillations lasting a few seconds and displaying a
typical waxing-and-waning appearance. When sleep deepens, slow-wave complexes, such as delta (1– 4 Hz) and
slower waves (ϳ1 Hz), progressively dominate the EEG.
Slow-wave sleep is interrupted by periods of rapid-eyemovement (REM) sleep, during which the EEG activity
has a low amplitude and high frequencies, similar to that
during arousal. Finally, the cortex participates in several
forms of epileptic seizures, such as the 3-Hz “spike-andwave” complexes (241).

emphasized that cortical neurons are endowed with intrinsic properties that participate in rhythm generation
and that brain rhythms should not be described as the
passive driving of the cerebral cortex by impulses originating from pacemakers (37, 40). Bremer’s proposal for
the genesis of EEG rhythmicities rested on four core
ideas: 1) the EEG rhythmicity is generated by the oscillatory activity of cortical neurons; 2) the genesis of these
oscillations depends on properties intrinsic to cortical
neurons; 3) EEG oscillations are generated by the synchronization of oscillatory activity in large assemblies of
cortical neurons; and 4) the mechanisms responsible for
synchronization are due to intracortical excitatory connections. Most of these assumptions have been validated,
and the modern view of EEG genesis is largely based on
these principles (see below).
Experiments on motoneurons in the spinal cord (110)
provided convincing evidence that the EEG reflects summated postsynaptic potentials. To explain the slow time
course of EEG waves, Eccles (110) postulated that distal
dendritic potentials, and their slow electrotonic propagation to soma, participate in the genesis of the EEG. This
assumption was confirmed by intracellular recordings
from cortical neurons, which demonstrated a close correspondence between the EEG and synaptic potentials
(68, 69, 184). This view of the genesis of the EEG is still
widely held (243).

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

D. Thalamocortical Loops
We focus here on two types of rhythms: spindle
oscillations and absence seizures, both of which are generated in the thalamocortical system schematized in Figure 1. Sensory inputs from visual, auditory, and somatosensory receptors do not reach the cerebral cortex directly, but synapse first on thalamocortical (TC) relay

Physiol Rev • VOL

FIG. 1. Arrangement of inputs and output projections in the
thalamocortical system. Four cell types and their connectivity are
shown: thalamocortical (TC) relay cells, thalamic reticular (RE) neuron,
cortical pyramidal cells (PY), and interneurons (IN). TC cells receive
prethalamic (Pre) afferent connections, which may be sensory afferents
in the case of specific thalamic nuclei involved in vision, audition, and
somatosensory modalities. This information is relayed to the corresponding area of cerebral cortex through ascending thalamocortical
fibers (upward arrow). These axons have collaterals that contact the RE
nucleus on the way to the cerebral cortex, where they arborize in
superficial layers I and II, layer IV, and layer VI. Corticothalamic feedback is mediated primarily by a population of layer VI PY neurons that
project to the thalamus. The corticothalamic fibers (downward arrow)
also leave collaterals within the RE nucleus and dorsal thalamus. RE
cells thus form an inhibitory network that surrounds the thalamus,
receive a copy of nearly all thalamocortical and corticothalamic activity,
and project inhibitory connections solely to neurons in the thalamic
relay nuclei. Projections between TC, RE, and PY cells are usually
organized topographically such that each cortical column is associated
with a given sector of thalamic TC and RE cells. [Modified from Destexhe et al. (100).]

cells in specific regions of the thalamus. These relay cells
in turn project to their respective area in primary sensory
cortex. These topographically organized forward projections are matched by feedback projections from layer 6 of
cortex to the corresponding afferent thalamic nucleus
(174, 278).
Within the thalamus, there are reciprocal connections between TC and thalamic reticular (RE) neurons.
The RE cells are GABAergic and send their projections
exclusively to relay nuclei, but they also receive excitatory collaterals from both ascending (thalamocortical)

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

firmed in intracellular recordings from vertebrate slice
preparations (6, 171, 172, 204 –207), which revealed that
central neurons also have complex intrinsic properties
(202).
The nonlinear interactions between ionic conductances are complex. Computational models can make a
significant contribution in linking the microscopic properties of ion channels and cellular behavior. This approach was used by Hodgkin and Huxley (157) to understand the genesis of action potentials, and essentially the
same approach has been used in modeling studies to
understand the complex behavior of central neurons. Perhaps the best characterized neurons in the vertebrate
brain are those in the thalamus, which we review here
(see sect. II).
In addition to having complex intrinsic properties,
neurons also interact in various ways, including chemical
synaptic transmission, electrical coupling through gap
junctions, and ephaptic interactions through electric
fields. Whole cell and patch-clamp recording techniques
(264) have been used to investigate the detailed mechanisms underlying the conductances of ionic channels involved in synaptic transmission. An extraordinarily rich
variety of dynamic properties of synaptic interactions
between central neurons has been uncovered on a wide
range of time scales. Many neurotransmitters and receptor types have been identified in the thalamocortical system (222), each of which confers characteristic temporal
properties to synaptic interactions. The properties of the
main receptor types mediating synaptic interactions are
now well understood.
It is now well accepted that rhythmicity arises from
both intrinsic and synaptic properties (106b, 310, 312).
Some neurons generate oscillations through intrinsic
properties and interact with other types of neurons
through multiple types of synaptic receptors. These complex interactions generate large-scale coherent oscillations. Understanding how the interactions between ionic
conductances can generate rhythms is difficult, and computational models can help in exploring the underlying
mechanisms. This review shows how this approach has
been used to understand how the interplay between intrinsic and synaptic conductances generate oscillations at
the network level (see sect. III).

1403

1404

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

Physiol Rev • VOL

II. SINGLE-CELL PACEMAKERS: OSCILLATIONS
AND BURSTS EMERGING FROM THE
INTERPLAY OF INTRINSIC CONDUCTANCES
IN SINGLE NEURONS
We first review how interactions between conductances within a single cell can generate phenomena like
bursting or intrinsic oscillations, and how these properties are tuned by calcium and neuromodulators. We examine these mechanisms through computational models
constrained by experimental data.
A. Thalamic Relay Cells
1. Rebound bursts in thalamic relay cells
In addition to relaying sensory input to cortex, TC
neurons have intrinsic properties that allow them to generate activity endogenously. Following inhibition, these
cells can under some circumstances produce bursts of
action potentials, called a “low-threshold spike” (LTS) or
“postinhibitory rebound.” The importance of the rebound
response of TC cells was first established by Andersen
and Eccles (9), who called it “postanodal exaltation.” It
was later characterized in vitro by Llina´ s and Jahnsen
(209) and in vivo by Descheˆ nes et al. (84) and has become
generally known as the “rebound burst” or LTS. Andersen
and Eccles (9) were the first to show that TC cells display
bursts of action potentials tightly correlated with the
offset of inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs).
In vitro studies (209, 171) demonstrated that TC cells
possess two different firing modes. In the “tonic” mode,
near the resting membrane potential (approximately Ϫ60
mV), the relay neuron fires trains of action potentials at a
frequency proportional to the amplitude of the injected
current (Fig. 2A, left panel). This is similar to the response
of many other neurons and is explained by the voltagedependent Naϩ and Kϩ currents that generate action
potentials. In contrast, at hyperpolarized membrane potentials, thalamic neurons can enter a “burst mode” (Fig.
2A, right panel), firing high-frequency bursts of action
potentials (ϳ300 Hz) at the offset of hyperpolarizing current injection. A burst can also occur following a strong
IPSP, which provides hyperpolarization and return to rest
similar to the conditions simulated by current injection.
The response of a neuron to a depolarizing current injection depends on its previous state, producing a steady
low-frequency firing rate if injected at a depolarized level,
but eliciting a burst followed by a long afterhyperpolarization if injected in a sufficiently hyperpolarized state.
The ionic mechanism underlying the “low-threshold”
behavior of thalamic neurons is a slow, low-threshold
Ca2ϩ current (171, 172), which was characterized in voltage-clamp experiments (67, 71, 148, 319). This current is

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

and descending (corticothalamic) fibers. Thalamocortical
loops therefore include both bidirectional excitatory interactions between the cortex and thalamus and inhibition through the collaterals of ascending and descending
fibers to GABAergic neurons. These inhibitory interactions are needed to explain the large-scale synchrony of
thalamocortical oscillations (see sect. IV).
Several types of brain rhythms originate in the
thalamocortical system. Spindle waves are by far the best
understood type of rhythmicity in this system, in part
because they can be enhanced by anesthetics such as
barbiturates (8, 81). The thalamic origin of spindles was
first suggested by Bishop (28), who observed the suppression of rhythmic activity in the cortex after sectioning
connections with the thalamus and was confirmed in
experiments on decorticated animals (3, 234). The cellular events underlying this rhythmic activity have been
identified in vivo (305, 310) and in isolated thalamic slices
in vitro (346). The biophysical mechanisms underlying
spindle rhythmicity were uncovered in slice preparations,
particularly the voltage-dependent conductances and receptor types involved. Theories for the genesis and termination of spindle oscillations need to be rigorously tested.
Absence seizures also originate in the thalamocortical system. Because they are generalized and involve
large-scale synchrony, Jasper and Kershman (173) suggested that they may have foci in thalamic nuclei that
widely project to cortex. This hypothesis was supported
by chronic recordings during absence seizures in humans,
showing that signs of a seizure were observed first in the
thalamus before appearing in the cortex (360; but see Ref.
240). Experimental models of absence seizures, such as
the penicillin model in cats (256), showed that although
the thalamus is critical for generating seizures, it was not
sufficient to explain all of their properties. Seizures can be
obtained from injection of convulsants limited to cerebral
cortex, but not when the same drugs are injected into the
thalamus (130, 258, 302). It is now clear that both the
thalamus and the cortex are necessary partners in these
experimental models of absence seizures, but the exact
mechanisms are unknown (74, 129). Computational models can help identify the critical parameters involved in
the genesis of pathological behavior, as well as suggest
ways to resolve apparently inconsistent experimental observations, as explored in section IV.
Despite progress in understanding how the EEG is
generated, the possible significance of brain oscillations
for the large-scale organization of information processing
in the brain remains a mystery. After summarizing current
knowledge of the mechanisms that generate spindle oscillations, absence seizures, and other types of thalamocortical oscillations, we explore possible functions for
these rhythms (see sect. IVC) suggested by the computational models.

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

1405

carried by low-voltage activated Ca2ϩ channels described
previously (49, 50) and later called “T-type” Ca2ϩ channels
(242). Cloning of the T-type channels revealed several
distinct subunits, which may account for functional difference according to the type of subunit assembling the
channel (192). Like the Naϩ current described by Hodgkin
and Huxley (157), the T current (IT) of thalamic neurons
is transient and shows activation followed by inactivation.
However, the voltage range over which IT activates is
close to the resting potential, in contrast to the Naϩ
current, which activates at more depolarized levels. The
kinetics of IT are considerably slower than the Naϩ current. A voltage-clamp characterization of the IT in thalamic cells performed in dissociated TC cells by Huguenard and Prince (163) provided the quantitative data on

Physiol Rev • VOL

the kinetics of activation and inactivation of this current
used in the computational models below.
2. Models of the rebound burst and the role
of dendrites
Hodgkin and Huxley (157) introduced computational
models to determine whether the ionic mechanisms identified in their voltage-clamp measurements were sufficient
to account for the generation of the action potential. The
same approach was taken to study the genesis of bursting
behavior. Hodgkin-Huxley-type models of TC neurons
were first introduced by McMullen and Ly (230) and Rose
and Hindmarsh (262) based on the experiments of
Jahnsen and Llina´ s (171). The more recent characterization of the IT by voltage-clamp methods (see above) pro-

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 2. Intrinsic electrophysiological properties of thalamic relay neurons. A: intracellular recordings of guinea pig
thalamic relay neurons in vitro. Left: a depolarization that is subthreshold at resting level (bottom trace) produced
repetitive firing if delivered at a depolarized direct-current (DC) level (top trace). Right: when the same stimulus was
given at a hyperpolarized DC level, the cell produced high-frequency bursts of action potentials. [Modified from Llinas
and Jahnen (209).] B. computational model. Tonic and burst responses were obtained in a single-compartment model
including various voltage-dependent currents, such as IT and the INa and IKd currents for generating action potentials.
Tonic and burst responses could be obtained either by various stimuli at the same membrane voltage (left) or by the same
stimulus applied at different membrane potential levels (right). [Modified from McCormick and Huguenard (225).]

1406

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

Physiol Rev • VOL

channel densities. The results based on this type of distribution were equivalent to those based on the distribution of IT density discussed above.1 Thus it is essential
that most of the T channels are dendritic, but how they
are distributed within the dendrites is not critical. A similar conclusion about dendritic currents was reached in a
model of delta oscillations in TC cells (113).
The localization of dendritic calcium currents in dendrites has several functional consequences. First, the
presence of the calcium current at the same sites as
inhibitory synapses is likely to enhance the rebound responses of TC cells (106c). Second, the shunting effects of
tonic excitatory cortical synapses and inhibitory synapses
on burst generation would be more effective if the IT were
dendritic (106). As a consequence, the activity of corticothalamic synapses can counteract bursting, and rapidly
switch the TC neuron from the burst mode (cortical synapses silent) to the tonic mode (sustained cortical drive).
Local dendritic interactions thus allow corticothalamic
feedback to potentially control the state of thalamic neurons on a millisecond time scale compared with conventional neuromodulatory mechanisms, which operate over
hundreds of milliseconds (222).
3. Bursts in awake animals
The TC cells in the thalamus generate powerful synchronized bursts of action potentials during sleep; in comparison, the activity in alert animals is dominated by
single-spike (tonic) firing (201, 309). There is, however,
evidence for the presence of bursts in the thalamus of
awake animals (142, 143, 278). These thalamic bursts may
represent a special type of information in alert states,
such as novelty detection (278). However, the occurrence
of bursts is rare in the thalamus of aroused animals and
may instead signify that the animal is drowsy (296); this
possibility is supported by observations that thalamic
bursts are negatively correlated with attention (357).
The occurrence of bursts as a rebound to inhibition
during oscillatory states similar to sleep oscillations (9,
305, 312) has been intensively studied with computational
models (reviewed in Ref. 106b), but bursts following excitatory inputs have not been as well studied (106c).
Excitatory stimulation by sensory synapses was modeled
by a constant density of glutamatergic (AMPA) synapses
on proximal TC dendrites (174, 197), up to 40 ␮m from the
soma. The threshold for action potential generation was

1
All the conclusions of the model with high uniform density of IT
in dendrites (1.7 ϫ 10Ϫ5 cm/s in soma and 8.5 ϫ 10Ϫ5 cm/s in dendrites;
Ref. 106) could be obtained using a nonuniform distribution of T channels (10.3 ϫ 10Ϫ5 cm/s in soma, 20.6 ϫ 10Ϫ5 cm/s in proximal dendrites
Ͻ40 ␮m from soma, and 2.5 ϫ 10Ϫ5 cm/s elsewhere), similar to the
pattern estimated by Williams and Stuart (361).

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

vided precise measurements for the time constants and
steady-state values of activation and inactivation processes. Several Hodgkin-Huxley-type models based on
voltage-clamp data replicate the rebound-burst properties
of TC cells (95, 96, 106, 162, 214, 225, 332, 352, 356). The
most salient features of the rebound burst can be reproduced by single-compartment models containing Naϩ, Kϩ,
and T-type currents described by Hodgkin-Huxley-type
kinetics (Fig. 2B). Simplified “integrate-fire and burst”
models have also successfully reproduced the most salient features of TC cells bursts (284). However, to reproduce all the features of the rebound burst in TC cells, the
IT must be concentrated in the dendrites, where a large
number of synaptic terminals are located (174, 197).
Imaging experiments clearly show dendritic calcium
signals during bursts in TC cells (238, 373), consistent
with results from current-clamp and voltage-clamp experiments (106, 371). The dendritic localization of the IT was
shown by direct measurements of channel activity in
dendrites (361). To estimate the IT density in dendrites, a
TC neuron was recorded in slices of the ventrobasal
thalamus (163), stained with biocytin, and reconstructed
using a computerized camera lucida (106). Two sets of
data were used to constrain the amount of calcium current in dendrites. First, recordings of the IT were made
from dissociated TC cells (163), which lack most of the
dendritic structure and are electrotonically compact,
therefore minimizing voltage-clamp errors. These recordings were then compared with voltage-clamp measurements of the IT in intact TC cells, which were ϳ5–14 times
larger than in dissociated cells (106).
Models based on the reconstructed dendritic morphology of TC cells were used to explore the consequences of varying the density of the current in the different dendritic and somatic regions (106). The low amplitude of IT in dissociated cells could be reconciled with
the high-amplitude currents observed in intact cells if the
concentration of T-type calcium channels was 4.5–7.6
times higher in the dendrites than in the soma (106). The
same density gradient of calcium channels in the model
also reproduced the bursts of spikes evoked in the current-clamp protocols (106). Similar findings were reported in another modeling study (12), which predicted
that the dendrites of TC cells must contain the IT (in
addition to delayed-rectifier Kϩ current IKd). This was
needed for the model to generate tonic or burst firing with
the correct voltage-dependent behavior and oscillations
(12).
The predicted high densities of T-type calcium channels in the dendrites of TC cells were confirmed by direct
measurements of channel activity using cell-attached recordings (361). The density was, however, not uniform,
but was concentrated mostly in stem dendrites up to 40
␮m from the soma, while distal dendrites had low T-

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

Physiol Rev • VOL

4. Intrinsic oscillations in thalamic relay cells
In addition to displaying burst and tonic modes, TC
cells can also generate sustained oscillations. In experiments performed in cats in vivo, TC cells generated oscillations in the delta frequency range (0.5– 4 Hz) after
removal of the cortex (73). Oscillations in the same frequency range were also observed in TC cells in vitro (190,
191, 226). These intrinsic slow oscillations consisted of
rebound bursts recurring periodically and have been also
called “pacemaker oscillations” (190, 191). These slow
oscillations were resistant to tetrodotoxin, suggesting
that they were generated by mechanisms intrinsic to the
TC cell.
The intrinsic delta oscillations depend on the membrane potential (226). Oscillations were only possible if
TC cells were maintained at relatively hyperpolarized potentials, within the range of the burst mode, suggesting
that the IT actively participated in its generation. Another
property, illustrated in Figure 3A, is that these oscillations
disappeared following blockade of another current, called
Ih (226) with Csϩ. Ih is a mixed Naϩ/Kϩ cation current
responsible for anomalous rectification in TC cells (253).
In voltage-clamp, Ih is activated by hyperpolarization in
the subthreshold range of potentials (226, 290). These
data indicate that intrinsic oscillations in TC cells are
generated by an interplay between IT and Ih.
5. Models of the conductance interplay to generate
intrinsic oscillations
Several computational models have shown that the
interaction between Ih and IT can account for the genesis
of low-frequency oscillations in TC cells (91, 95, 96, 214,
217, 225, 332, 352). In addition to IT (see above), these
models included Hodgkin-Huxley-type models of Ih based
on voltage-clamp data obtained in TC cells. Several types
of models have been used for this current, beginning with
simple one-variable models based on a single activation
gate (96, 214, 217, 225, 332, 352). This class of models only
has one gate and cannot account for the observation that
the Ih activates slowly, with a time constant greater than
1 s at 36°C (226, 290), but deactivates faster (114, 125, 175,
335, 340). A model with a dual gating process, combining
fast and slow activation gates, can reproduce the voltageclamp behavior of Ih in detail (91, 95).
Although both types of models of Ih gave rise to slow
oscillations when Ih is combined with IT, the doubleactivation model generated more complex oscillatory patterns, such as waxing-and-waning oscillations (see below). Figure 3B illustrates the oscillations generated by a
single-compartment model of a TC cell comprising IT and
Ih, as well as INa/IK responsible for action potentials.
Examination of IT and Ih conductances during the oscillation revealed that the activation of Ih depolarizes the

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

estimated by increasing the conductance of this synapse
and, as expected, when the cell was hyperpolarized (less
than Ϫ65 mV), the synaptic stimulus could evoke bursts
of action potentials. At more depolarized resting values
(more than Ϫ65 mV), excitatory stimuli evoked tonic
firing. In control conditions, the region of membrane potential corresponding to the burst mode was large, and
the minimal excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) amplitude to evoke a burst was about 0.035 ␮S (106c), which
represents ϳ230 –350 simultaneously releasing glutamatergic synapses, based on an estimated quantal amplitude
of 100 –150 pS (246, 247). Models therefore predict that an
excitatory stimulus should efficiently evoke bursts only
when the TC cell is in the right range of membrane
potentials.
In contrast, when the membrane of model TC cells
was more leaky, as occurs during tonic activity of the
network in vivo, the burst region narrowed, and there was
a large range of stimulus amplitudes for which the only
possible spike output was the tonic mode (106c). Under
these conditions, the minimal EPSP amplitude needed to
evoke bursts was ϳ0.09 ␮S, which corresponds to ϳ600 –
900 simultaneously releasing synapses. In the visual thalamus, the evoked conductance from a single retinal afferent is 0.6 –3.4 nS (1.7 nS on average), which represents
from 4 to 27 quantal events (246). This suggests that the
simultaneous release of all terminal sites from 8 to 87
retinal axons are required to evoke bursts in relay cells
(from 22 to 220 under in vivo conditions). However, one
morphological study reported that a single retinal axon
can make a large number of synaptic terminals onto the
same relay neuron, forming a significant proportion of all
of its retinal synapses (145). It is therefore possible that
the convergence of a relatively small number of afferent
axons could evoke bursts, which would support the notion that bursts are easily triggered by afferent excitatory
synapses. More precise measurements of the number of
synaptic terminals from single axons are needed to determine the convergence of afferent activity needed to trigger bursts in relay cells.
Models of TC neurons based on reconstructed morphologies and dendritic IT therefore suggest that sensoryinitiated bursts are possible, but they require a large
convergence of excitatory stimuli and are more likely to
occur under conditions of low activity. This is consistent
with the view that in burst mode the thalamus strongly
filters afferent information (223). This also supports the
view that bursts may be a “wake-up call” signal during
drowsiness or inattentive states (278), although it is not
clear how the cortex would distinguish these “wake-up”
bursts from bursts occurring spontaneously (or in an
oscillation) during states of low vigilance.

1407

1408

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

membrane slowly until a LTS is generated by activation of
IT. During the depolarization provided by the LTS, Ih
deactivates, and together with the termination of the LTS
the membrane becomes hyperpolarized. This hyperpolarization allows IT to deinactivate to prepare for the next
LTS, and as Ih slowly activates, the cycle restarts. The
same mechanism has been explored, with minor variations, in several modeling studies that used different models of IT and Ih (91, 95, 96, 152, 214, 217, 225, 332, 352),
suggesting that the interplay between IT and Ih is a highly
robust way to generate slow oscillations. This conclusion
is also supported by a dynamic-clamp study showing that
delta oscillations are lost in TC cells if Ih is blocked, but
can be restored by injection of a computer-generated Ih
conductance (161).
Physiol Rev • VOL

6. Waxing-and-waning oscillations
The slow intrinsic oscillations generated by TC cells
can be modulated by different factors. Cat TC cells studied in a low-Mg2ϩ medium in vitro displayed either a
resting state, sustained slow oscillations, or intermittent
“waxing-and-waning” oscillations (190, 191) (second trace
in Fig. 3A). The latter consisted of an alternation between
periods of oscillation (0.5–3.2 Hz), lasting 1–28 s, with
periods of silence, lasting 5–25 s, during which the membrane progressively hyperpolarized. The waxing-and-waning envelope was resistant to tetrodotoxin (191), suggesting mechanisms intrinsic to the TC neuron. In analogy
with the waxing and waning of spindles observed in vivo,
they have also been called “spindlelike oscillations” (190,

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 3. Intrinsic oscillatory properties of thalamic relay neurons. A: intracellular recordings of a cat thalamic relay
neuron in vitro showing different oscillatory modes following application of cesium (Csϩ). Csϩ was applied extracellularly to a cell that had no spontaneous oscillations (control). Four minutes after the application of Csϩ, spontaneous
waxing-and-waning oscillations began (silent periods of 4 –9 s and oscillatory sequences lasting for 2– 6 s). After an
additional 4 min, the oscillations became sustained (frequency of 1–2 Hz) and persisted for ϳ6 min before all activity
ceased. [Modified from Soltesz et al. (290).] B: computational model of intrinsic oscillations in thalamic relay cells. The
model had a calcium-mediated regulation of Ih. i: Three different modes with different conductance values of Ih. From
top to bottom: relay state (gh ϭ 0.025 mS/cm2), slow waxing-and-waning (“spindle-like”) oscillations (gh ϭ 0.02 mS/cm2),
and delta oscillations (gh ϭ 0.005 mS/cm2). ii: Intrinsic waxing-and-waning oscillation at higher time resolution. Top
trace shows the fraction of channels in the calcium-bound open state (OL), and the membrane potential is shown at
bottom. [Modified from Destexhe et al. (96).]

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

191). However, in vivo spindles oscillate at a higher frequency (7–14 Hz) and depend on interactions with neurons of the thalamic reticular nucleus (see sect. IIIC),
which distinguishes them from the waxing-and-waning
oscillations intrinsic to TC cells.
The pharmacology of intrinsic waxing-and-waning
oscillations was investigated by Soltesz et al. (290), who
found that they were dependent on Ih. Slow delta-like
oscillations and waxing-and-waning oscillations can be
observed in the same TC cell by altering Ih (290) (Fig. 3A).
Increasing the amplitude of Ih by norepinephrine can
transform delta-like oscillations into waxing-and-waning
oscillations; application of Csϩ, an Ih blocker, transforms
the depolarized state into waxing-and-waning oscillations,
the delta-like oscillations, and finally a hyperpolarized
resting state (290) (Fig. 3A). In addition, the intrinsic
waxing-and-waning oscillations can be transformed into
sustained slow delta-like oscillations by applying a depolarizing current (190, 191).

Several ionic mechanisms for generating waxing-andwaning oscillations have been suggested. The first model
(95) was inspired by experiments on the Ih current in
heart cells demonstrating regulation of Ih by intracellular
Ca2ϩ (144). The steady-state activation of Ih is dependent
on the intracellular Ca2ϩ concentration ([Ca2ϩ]i), shifting
toward more positive membrane potentials with increasing [Ca2ϩ]i (144). Because calmodulin and protein kinase
C were not involved in the Ca2ϩ modulation of Ih, Ca2ϩ
may affect the Ih channels directly (144), with the binding
of Ca2ϩ increasing the conductance of Ih, or indirectly
through the production of cAMP (213). Different variants
of calcium-dependent regulation of Ih have been proposed
(72, 85, 222).
The modulation of Ih by Ca2ϩ was studied in several
bursting models of the TC cells. The simplest model was
based on the assumption that Ca2ϩ bind directly to the
open state of the channel, thereby “locking” Ih into the
open configuration and shifting its voltage dependence as
observed experimentally (95). Calcium upregulation was
also proposed to occur according to a model in which the
calcium indirectly affects the Ih channel through an intermediate messenger, which itself binds to the open state of
Ih channels (96). Another ionic mechanism for waning has
been proposed (350) based on activity-dependent adenosine production, which affects the voltage dependence of
Ih but in the opposite direction (244). Waxing-and-waning
oscillations were also modeled by the interaction between IT, Ih, and a slow potassium current (91, 152).
All models generated waxing-and-waning oscillations, but only those based on the upregulation of Ih by
Ca2ϩ reproduced the slow periodicity, the slow oscillation
frequency, and the progressive hyperpolarization of the
Physiol Rev • VOL

membrane during the silent period. Moreover, the Ca2ϩdependent models also displayed the correct coexistence
of oscillatory and resting states in TC cells, as shown in
Figure 3Bi. For fixed IT conductance, increasing Ih conductance led successively to slow oscillations in the delta range
(1– 4 Hz), then to waxing-and-waning slow oscillations and,
finally, to the relay resting state, consistent with in vitro
studies (290) (compare with Fig. 3A). According to this
mechanism for waxing-and-waning oscillation (Fig. 3Bii),
calcium enters through IT channels on each burst, resulting
in an increase of Ca2ϩ (or Ca2ϩ-bound messenger) and a
gradual increase of Ih channels in the open state (OL). This
produces a progressive afterdepolarization (ADP) following
each burst until the cell ceases to oscillate (Fig. 3Bii). The
membrane then progressively hyperpolarizes during the
silent period, as Ih channels unbind the messenger.
The presence of this ADP was observed during waxing-and-waning oscillations in cat TC cells maintained in
low magnesium in vitro (191), as well as in ferret thalamic
slices (19). It is possible to artificially induce this ADP by
evoking repetitive burst discharges in TC cells (19). The
ADP is responsible for a marked diminution of input
resistance in successive responses (19). These features
were observed in a model based on the upregulation of Ih
by Ca2ϩ (96).
Recent experiments provide direct evidence for the
Ca2ϩ-dependent regulation of Ih channels predicted in
modeling studies. Although Ca2ϩ does not directly modulate Ih channels in thalamic neurons (44), experiments
with caged Ca2ϩ in thalamic neurons have demonstrated
an indirect calcium-dependent modulation of Ih (212),
with cAMP acting as the intermediate messenger (213).
B. Thalamic Reticular Neurons
1. Rebound bursts in thalamic reticular cells
RE neurons recorded in awake animals fire tonically,
but during slow-wave sleep the activity of these cells
changes to rhythmic firing of bursts (307). A typical burst
of action potentials in an RE cell during natural sleep
shows an accelerando-decelerando pattern of action potentials (Fig. 4A). In intracellular recordings, both modes
of firing in RE cells could be elicited, depending on the
membrane potential. Depolarizing current pulses from
Ϫ68 mV produced tonic firing, whereas the same pulse
delivered at more hyperpolarized levels elicited a burst.
The burst in a model RE cell shows a slowly rising phase
and is broader than in TC cells, and there is always an
accelerando-decelerando pattern of sodium spikes, typical of RE cells recorded from anesthetized, naturally
sleeping animals as well as in animals under different
anesthetics (59, 107, 237, 307) (Fig. 4A).
The rebound burst of RE cells studied in vitro (14,
17), like that of TC cells, is mediated by a low-threshold

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

7. Models of waxing-and-waning oscillations

1409

1410

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

Ca2ϩ current. However, the characterization of the T-type
Ca2ϩ current in RE cells by voltage-clamp methods revealed marked differences with the IT of TC cells. In RE
cells, the kinetics were slower and the activation was less
steep and more depolarized than that found in TC cells
(163). This current was named “slow IT”, or ITs. In some
preparations, however, the IT of RE cells appears to be
similar to that of TC cells (333). Nevertheless, the observation of two distinct types of T channels is consistent
with the differences observed after reconstitution of
cloned T channels, which displayed different voltage dependence and kinetics and regional distribution (321). In
particular, thalamic relay and reticular neurons express
different T-channel subtypes (321), consistent with the
electrophysiological differences found between TC and
RE neurons (163).
2. Models of the rebound burst in RE cells and the
role of dendrites
The properties of burst generation in RE cells were
examined in Hodgkin and Huxley (157) types of models
derived from voltage-clamp measurements. Early models
(90, 355) used a IT similar to that found in TC cells, based
Physiol Rev • VOL

on the data available at that time (14, 208, 228). More
recent characterization of the kinetics of the IT in RE cells
(163) has led to more accurate models of ITs in these cells
(97, 348).
Although single-compartment Hodgkin-Huxley type
models were able to account for the genesis of bursts in
RE cells, not all features of these bursts were found. For
example, the slowly rising phase of the burst, its broad
structure, and the accelerando-decelerando pattern of sodium spikes within RE bursts were not apparent (14, 17,
99, 165). Another feature not found in the models was that
RE bursts show qualitative differences between preparations: RE cells generate bursts in an all-or-none fashion in
vitro (99, 165), but bursts can be activated gradually in
vivo (59, 99).
The failure of a Hodgkin-Huxley model to simulate
these properties could reflect an incomplete knowledge
of the biophysical parameters of the IT because of errors
in voltage-clamp measurements. This is unlikely, however, because these measurements were done in dissociated RE neurons, which are electrotonically compact, and
the recordings had high resolution and low error. Another
possibility, proposed previously (237), is that because the

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 4. Bursting properties of thalamic
reticular neurons. A: bursts evoked in a rat
thalamic reticular neuron in vitro. Bursts
were obtained after intracellular injection of
depolarizing current pulses. A slight change
in injected current amplitude resulted in an
apparently all-or-none burst response. Bottom trace indicates a burst on a 5 times
faster time scale. B: computational model of
burst generation in thalamic reticular neurons with dendritic IT. Left: morphology of a
thalamic reticular neuron from rat ventrobasal thalamus, which was reconstructed
and incorporated in simulations. The dark
areas indicate the dendrites with high density of T-type current (0.045 mS/cm2 in soma,
0.6 mS/cm2 in distal dendrites). Right: burst
generated in this model following current
injection in the soma (top trace; 0.3 nA during 200 ms). The voltage in distal dendrites
(bottom trace) shows a slow rising and decaying calcium spike mediated by ITs. In
both cases, the bursts had a slow rising
phase, and sodium spikes within a burst
showed a typical accelerando-decelerando
pattern. [Modified from Destexhe et al. (99).]

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

3. Physiological consequences of dendritic
calcium currents
In contrast to TC cells, RE cells are highly noncompact electrotonically. Comparing neurons reconstructed
from the same animal, the maximal electrotonic length of
TC cells was 0.34 (106), compared with 2.7 in RE neurons
(99). Consequently, the dendrites are relatively decoupled
from the soma in RE cells, and the dendritic localization
of voltage-dependent currents is likely to have significant
consequences in these cells.
The first consequence is that the colocalization of
dendritic IT with dendritic GABAergic synapses may enhance the rebound properties of these neurons. RE neurons contact their neighbors through GABAergic axon
collaterals (21, 174, 197) or dendro-dendritic GABAergic
synapses (83, 252, 368). Intracellular recordings revealed
GABAergic IPSPs in RE cells (21, 97, 265, 266, 280, 336,
372), but they are of relatively low amplitude and might
not be sufficient to elicit a rebound burst at short latency
(338). However, if the IT is dendritic, IPSPs arising from
neighboring RE cells might initiate rebound bursts in
Physiol Rev • VOL

localized dendritic regions, without a trace of IPSP in
somatic recordings (106c). The possibility that mutual
inhibitory interactions between RE cells may generate
rebound bursts and oscillatory behavior is considered in
section IIIB.
Alternatively, if the dendrites of RE cells at rest are
close to the reversal potential of the IPSPs, GABAergic
inputs could counteract the initiation of burst discharges
by shunting inhibition. In this case, mutual inhibition
between RE cells would prevent them from generating
large bursts, which may protect the cells from epileptic
discharges (see sect. IVB). Thus interactions between RE
cells will critically depend on the dendritic membrane
potential and the reversal potential of IPSPs. The range of
possible interactions, and their impact at the network
level, is considered in section IIIB.
Dendritic IT make RE cells exquisitely sensitive to
cortical EPSPs. Models have shown that glutamatergic
(AMPA) EPSPs, which are subthreshold in the tonic
mode, can evoke full-blown bursts of action potentials if
the cell is more hyperpolarized (88, 106c). The threshold
for burst generation by excitatory synapses was ϳ0.03 ␮S
and increased to 0.065 ␮S under in vivo conditions, somewhat less than for relay cells. Given that the quantal
conductance of glutamatergic synapses on reticular neurons is ϳ266 Ϯ 48 pS (137), these threshold values predict
a convergence of ϳ113 excitatory releasing sites in control conditions, and ϳ244 releasing sites under in vivo
conditions. However, for focal or “hot-spot” distributions,
the threshold was much lower, 0.007 ␮S, corresponding to
ϳ26 releasing sites, but it was not possible to evoke
bursts under in vivo conditions in this case (106c).
This remarkable sensitivity occurs only if the dendrites contain a high density of ITs, and if they are hyperpolarized enough to deinactivate the IT. Consistent with
this sensitivity, in vivo recordings show that corticothalamic excitatory volleys are extremely efficient in triggering bursts in RE cells and eliciting oscillations (59, 66).
The sensitivity of RE cells to cortical EPSPs is the basis
for the “inhibitory dominance” hypothesis (100), according to which cortical influence on the thalamus occurs
primarily through the feed-forward inhibitory pathway
through RE cells rather than the direct excitatory one
onto TC cells and is critical for understanding the largescale synchrony of oscillations (see sect. IVA).
With dendritic localization of ITs, high levels of synaptic background activity may prevent bursts (88, 99,
106c). This suppression of bursting does not occur in a
single compartment model, suggesting that the interaction between the soma with sodium spikes and the dendrites with calcium spikes depends on the level of synaptic background activity. The dendrites of RE cells would
“sample” the overall synaptic activity between the thalamus and the cortex and tune the responsiveness of the RE
cells according to these inputs. For high levels of back-

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

IT of intact cells is located in the dendrites, the electrophysiological behavior recorded in the soma is significantly distorted. This possibility was tested using compartmental models of the dendritic morphology of RE
cells (99).
Following a similar approach to that taken with TC
cells in section IIA2, an RE neuron was recorded in the
reticular sector of the ventrobasal thalamus in rat thalamic slices (163), stained with biocytin, and reconstructed using a computerized camera lucida (Fig. 4B,
left). Voltage-clamp recordings were also obtained from
dissociated RE cells (163), which are mostly devoid of
dendrites, and intact RE cells (99). Computational models
were then used to estimate how much current density
must be located in dendrites to reproduce all the experimental results. The conclusion was that high densities of
IT must be located in dendrites to account for these
measurements.
Bursts generated with dendritic IT are shown in Figure 4B. The calcium spike generated in the dendrites
slowly injects current into the soma/axon, where action
potentials are generated. The slowly rising phase of the
burst as well as the accelerando-decelerando pattern result from an interaction between the soma and dendrites
and the slow kinetics of the IT (99). Dendritic IT also
accounts for the broader currents seen in intact RE cells
under voltage clamp. Moreover, bursts were all or none
under control conditions but were graded in simulations
of in vivo conditions when synaptic background activity
was included. These features were a direct consequence
of dendritic Ca2ϩ currents and were confirmed by presumed intradendritic recordings (see details in Ref. 99).

1411

1412

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

ground activity, which occur during tonic activity in the
thalamus and cortex, the RE cell does not have a tendency to fire bursts. For lower levels of background activity, or more phasic inputs such as during synchronized
sleep, the dendrites would no longer be bombarded in a
sustained manner, and bursting behavior would be enhanced. It is possible that this type of interplay of currents
in the dendrites acts in concert with neuromodulation to
efficiently switch the thalamus between tonic and bursting modes, which may be an efficient way to implement
attentional mechanisms controlled by cortical activity
(88).
4. Intrinsic oscillations in thalamic reticular cells

5. Models of the interacting conductances underlying
intrinsic oscillations
Several models have been introduced to investigate
the repetitive bursting properties of RE cells. All models
with ITs, Ca2ϩ, and IK(Ca) robustly generated oscillations
at low frequency (2– 4 Hz) (97, 105, 355). These oscillations could be elicited as a rebound rhythmic bursting
activity in response to a hyperpolarizing pulse. The 2- to
4-Hz frequency was mainly dependent on the level of the
resting potential and on the kinetics of ITs and IK(Ca). This
mechanism was similar to that suggested by currentPhysiol Rev • VOL

III. NETWORK PACEMAKERS: OSCILLATIONS
THAT DEPEND ON BOTH INTRINSIC
AND SYNAPTIC CONDUCTANCES
How the intrinsic neuronal properties reviewed
above combine at the network level to generate collective
behaviors in a population of neurons is a complex problem. We show here how a combination of experimental
data and models was used successfully to investigate this
problem. We illustrate how interacting intrinsic and synaptic conductances generate oscillations in circuits of
thalamic neurons.
A. Experimental Characterization
of Thalamic Oscillations
1. Early experiments
In humans, spindle oscillations are grouped in short
1- to 3-s periods of 7- to 14-Hz oscillations, organized

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

In addition to generating bursts, RE cells also participate in oscillations. In intracellular recordings from cat
RE cells in vivo (59, 237), rhythmic bursting activity at a
frequency of 8 –12 Hz occurred either spontaneously or
after stimulation of the internal capsule or thalamus. Typically, a depolarizing envelope accompanied this oscillatory behavior and a slow afterhyperpolarization (AHP)
following each burst; the termination of the oscillatory
sequence was followed by a tonic tail of spike activity
(107). The same features were observed in intracellular
recordings of RE cells in vitro (14, 17). A rebound sequence of rhythmic bursts could be elicited in RE cells
after current injection. In an in vitro study of rodent RE
cells (17), this rhythmic behavior was resistant to tetrodotoxin and was, therefore, intrinsic to the cell. The same
study also showed that blocking the AHP with apamin,
which blocks a class of calcium-activated potassium current [IK(Ca)], abolished the rhythmic activity. Rhythmic
oscillations in RE cells therefore reflect interactions between the T-type Ca2ϩ current and IK(Ca).
In an in vitro study of spindles in thalamic slices (17),
rhythmic oscillations at 7–12 Hz were often followed by a
short tonic tail of spikes. Application of TTX revealed an
ADP mediated by a nonspecific cation current, activated
by intracellular calcium, called ICAN. This current, encountered in many other cell types in the nervous system
(245), could underlie the tonic tail of spikes in RE cells
(17).

clamp experiments (14): following an LTS, Ca2ϩ enters
and activates IK(Ca), which then hyperpolarizes the membrane and deinactivates ITs. When the membrane depolarizes due to the deactivation of IK(Ca), a new LTS is
produced and the cycle repeats. The robustness of this
mechanism was confirmed in several modeling studies
(97, 105, 151, 348, 355).
Despite the ease with which these low-frequency
oscillations could be generated, none of the kinetic parameters tested for IK(Ca) was able to produce frequencies
in the range 7–14 Hz. The correct oscillations frequencies
occurred, however, when the outward current ICAN was
included. This current produces a marked ADP after application of tetrodotoxin and apamin (17). In the model
(97), such an ADP occurred in the presence of ITs and
ICAN as a rebound following a hyperpolarizing pulse. Simulations of a single compartment containing the combination of currents ITs, IK(Ca), and ICAN produced a rebound bursting oscillations at 9- to 11-Hz frequencies. The
activation of ICAN accelerated the rising phase of the burst
and increased the frequency of the rebound burst sequence. The presence of ICAN also terminated the oscillatory behavior by producing a tonic tail of spikes before
the membrane returned to its resting level. Varying the
conductance of IK(Ca) and ICAN modulated both the frequency and the relative importance of rhythmic bursting
relative to tonic tail activity. These results were confirmed
in another modeling study (348), in which the same set of
conductances was found to produce oscillations and
tonic tail activity. In particular, this study reported a
similar dependence of the repetitive firing frequency on
the membrane potential, with in addition a dependence
on the leak Kϩ conductance (348).

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

2. Different hypotheses for generating spindles
Based on their intracellular recordings of thalamic
neurons during spindles, Andersen and Eccles (9) reported that TC cells fired bursts of action potentials interleaved with IPSPs. They suggested that TC cells fire in
response to IPSPs (postinhibitory rebound), which was
later demonstrated to be a characteristic electrophysiological feature of thalamic cells (see sect. IIA). In particular, they suggested that the oscillations arose from the
reciprocal interactions between TC cells and inhibitory
local-circuit interneurons. This mechanism was then inPhysiol Rev • VOL

corporated into a computational model that provided a
phenomenological description of the inhibitory rebound
(10) (see also Ref. 210).
Although remarkably forward looking, the mechanism of Andersen and Eccles (9) was not entirely correct.
Reciprocal connections between TC cells and thalamic
interneurons have not been observed in anatomical studies, but intrathalamic loops of varying complexity have
been found between TC cells and the inhibitory neurons
of the thalamic RE nucleus, which receive collaterals
from corticothalamic and thalamocortical fibers and
project to specific and nonspecific thalamic nuclei (269).
That “TC-RE” loops could underlie recruitment phenomena and spindle oscillations was suggested by Scheibel
and Scheibel (269 –271), replacing the interneuron in the
“TC-interneuron” loops of Andersen and Eccles with the
reticular thalamic neurons. They specifically predicted
that the output of the RE nucleus should be inhibitory
(271) and that the inhibitory feedback from RE cells onto
TC cells should be critical for the genesis of thalamic
rhythmicity. This hypothesis was supported by the observation that the pattern of firing of RE neurons was tightly
correlated with IPSPs in TC neurons (272, 305, 369).
Subsequent experiments have firmly established the
involvement of the RE nucleus in the generation of spindles in cats in vivo (306, 308). First, cortically projecting
thalamic nuclei lose their ability to generate spindle oscillations if deprived of input from the RE nucleus (306).
Second, the isolated RE nucleus can itself generate rhythmicity in the spindle frequency range (308) (Fig. 5A). In
these experiments, the thickest region of the RE nucleus,
the rostral pole, was surgically isolated from dorsal thalamic and cortical afferents. This procedure created an
isolated “island” of RE cells whose blood supply was
preserved and in which the only remaining afferents were
fibers from the brain stem and basal forebrain. Extracellular field potentials from the isolated RE nucleus showed
rhythmicity in the same frequency range as in the intact
thalamus (308) (Fig. 5A). This observation suggested that
the RE nucleus is the pacemaker of spindle activity and
that oscillations in TC cells were entrained by rhythmic
IPSPs from RE cells.
The occurrence of spindle waves in slices (170, 322,
346, 351) (Fig. 6A) confirmed earlier experimental evidence (3, 234) for the genesis of spindles in the thalamus.
The spindle waves disappeared after the connections between TC and RE cells were physically cut (346), after
application of excitatory amino acid blockers (170, 346,
351), or if TC cells were selectively inactivated (322),
consistent with the mechanism based on intrathalamic
TC-RE loops proposed by Scheibel and Scheibel (269 –
271). These in vitro experiments also confirmed the in
vivo observation that the input from RE neurons is necessary to generate spindles (306). However, the RE nu-

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

within a waxing-and-waning envelope, recurring periodically every 10 –20 s. These oscillations typically appear
during the initial stages of slow-wave sleep (stage II) and
later during transitions between REM and slow-wave
sleep. In cats and rodents, spindle waves with similar
characteristics appear during slow-wave sleep and are
typically more prominent at sleep onset. They are enhanced by some anesthetics, such as barbiturates, which,
when administered at an appropriate dose, generate an
EEG dominated by spindles (8).
Bishop (28) showed that rhythmical activity was suppressed in cerebral cortex following destruction of its
connections with the thalamus and suggested that spindles are generated in the thalamus. Bremer (37) showed
that rhythmical activity is still present in the white matter
after destruction of the cortical mantle. Later, Adrian (3)
and Morison and Bassett (234) observed that spindle oscillations persist in the thalamus upon removal of the
cortex, providing strong evidence for the genesis of these
oscillations in the thalamus. These experiments led to the
development of the “thalamic pacemaker” hypothesis (8,
305), according to which rhythmic activity is generated in
the thalamus and communicated to the cortex, where it
entrains cortical neurons and is responsible for the rhythmical activity observed in the EEG.
Spindles have also been observed in thalamic slices
from different preparations. In the ferret visual thalamus,
slices that contain the dorsal (lateral geniculate nucleus
or LGN) and reticular nuclei (perigeniculate nucleus or
PGN) as well as the interconnections between them (346)
can display spindles (Fig. 6A). Spindles have also been
observed in mouse (351) and rat (170) thalamic slices, as
well as in rat thalamocortical slices (322), where they
survived in the thalamus following inactivation of the
cortex. These in vitro observations are definitive proof
that thalamic circuits are capable of endogenously generating spindle oscillations. Moreover, in vitro preparations
have made it possible to precisely characterize the ionic
mechanisms involved in spindle oscillations, as shown
below.

1413

1414

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

cleus maintained in vitro did not generate oscillations
without connections from TC cells (322, 346), in contrast
to the observation of spindle rhythmicity in the isolated
RE nucleus in vivo (308).
In summary, three different mechanisms have been
proposed to explain the genesis of thalamic rhythmicity:
the TC-interneuron loops of Andersen and Eccles (9), the
TC-RE loops of Scheibel and Scheibel (269 –271), and the
RE pacemaker hypothesis of Steriade et al. (308). In vitro
experiments appear to support the “TC-RE” loop mechanism, in contrast to in vivo experiments that support the
RE pacemaker hypothesis. We show below how computational models suggest a way to reconcile these apparently contradictory experimental observations.

Physiol Rev • VOL

B. Models of the Thalamic Reticular Pacemaker
1. Early models
The thalamic RE nucleus is a network of interconnected inhibitory neurons that might not be expected to
generate oscillations. The discovery that thalamic RE neurons were capable of a rebound burst (14, 208) suggested
that these cells could sustain oscillations through repetitive reciprocal inhibitory rebound. The genesis of oscillations in such inhibitory networks was investigated in
central pattern generators of invertebrates (249). However, in this structure, the neurons typically oscillate antiphase, inconsistent with the synchronized oscillations
observed in the RE nucleus.

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 5. Oscillations in the isolated reticular nucleus. A: spontaneous oscillations in the
spindle frequency range obtained in the deafferented thalamic reticular nucleus in vivo.
The field potentials recorded in the isolated RE
nucleus show rhythmicity in the spindle frequency range (bottom trace was filtered between 7 and 14 Hz). [Modified from Steriade et
al. (308).] B: model of oscillations mediated by
GABAA synapses in the RE nucleus. i: Oscillations in a network of 400 RE neurons in which
each cell was connected to its 24 nearest
neighbors. The average value of the membrane
potentials shows oscillations with a similar frequency as in the experiments. ii: Snapshots of
activity in a 100 RE neuron network during
waxing-and-waning oscillations corresponding
to the regions of the averaged membrane potential as indicated. The top series of snapshots was taken during the “desynchronized”
phase and shows highly irregular spatiotemporal behavior. The bottom series of snapshots
was taken during the “oscillatory” phase, when
the network is more synchronized and coherent oscillations were found in the averaged
activity. The time interval between frames was
40 ms. [Modified from Destexhe et al. (97).]

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

1415

Several computational models have been used to
explain the genesis of synchronized oscillations within
the RE nucleus (23, 90, 97, 98, 133, 134, 354). Two different hypotheses were proposed at about the same time.
Wang and Rinzel (354, 355) investigated the “slow-inhibition hypothesis,” postulating that networks of inhibitory
neurons can generate synchronized oscillations if they
interact through slow (presumably GABAB-mediated) inhibition. In contrast, other investigators proposed a “fastinhibition hypothesis” for generating synchronized oscillations based on fast (presumably GABAA-mediated) type of
inhibition (23, 90, 97). In the Wang and and Rinzel model,

Physiol Rev • VOL

the oscillatory behavior of two coupled RE neurons depended on the decay rate of inhibition: antiphase oscillations typically arose for fast inhibition, whereas slow
inhibition led to in-phase oscillations (355). These two
different mechanisms for producing oscillations can be
explained most clearly with phase plane diagrams (354).
One problem with the slow-inhibition hypothesis was that
it generated synchronized oscillations slower than the
ϳ10- to 15-Hz frequency observed in the thalamic RE
nucleus in vivo (308).
In a model of the fast-inhibition hypothesis, faster
oscillation frequencies (ϳ10 Hz) arose from fast inhibi-

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 6. Spindle waves resulting from interactions between thalamic relay and reticular neurons. A: spindle sequence
recorded both intracellularly and extracellularly in ferret visual thalamus in vitro. An intracellular recording was
performed in a thalamic reticular neuron (second trace), located in the perigeniculate (PGN) sector of the thalamic slice,
together with an extracellular recording (top trace) of relay cells in the dorsal lateral geniculate (LGNd) sector of the
slice. Another spindle sequence is shown recorded intracellularly in a relay neuron (LGNd, bottom trace), together with
an extracellular recording of relay cells (LGNd, third trace). RE cells tended to burst at every cycle of the oscillation,
while TC cells burst every 2 or 3 cycles. [Modified from von Krosigk et al. (346).] B: spindle oscillations in a 100-neuron
network of thalamic relay and reticular cells. Synaptic interactions were mediated by AMPA receptors (from TC to RE),
a mixture of GABAA and GABAB receptors (from RE to TC), and GABAA-mediated lateral inhibition between RE cells
(see Ref. 353 for details of the model). The fraction of TC and RE cells that are simultaneously active (␳TC and ␳RE) are
indicated together with one representative example of the membrane potential for each cell type (VTC and VRE) during
spindle oscillations. Individual TC cell produced bursts at a subharmonic frequency of the network oscillation, but the
population of TC cells oscillated at the spindle frequency (see raster plot in bottom graph). [Modified from Wang et al.
(353).]

1416

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

2. Models of oscillatory behavior in networks
of reticular neurons
Models of the RE nucleus have yielded insights into
the mechanisms underlying oscillations based on GABAAmediated synaptic interactions (23, 97). These models
incorporated biophysical measurements of the IT current
(163), as well as other currents (17), in RE cells.
The first step was to identify the different oscillatory
modes generated by circuits composed of Hodgkin-Huxley-type models of RE cells, connected by either GABAA
or GABAB synapses (97, 355). Different types of oscillatory modes were observed, such as antiphase bursting (as
in Ref. 249) and synchronized oscillations (97). The latter
Physiol Rev • VOL

type was the most frequent and depended on the connectivity. Two-dimensional networks of RE cells with dense
proximal connectivity (the same connectivity as in Ref.
90), with GABAA synapses, robustly generated synchronized oscillations at a frequency of 6.5–9 Hz (Fig. 5Bi).
The synchrony was not perfect, but the phases of the
individual bursts were distributed around zero, and the
overall synchrony of the network was visible in the average membrane potential, in cross-correlations (data not
shown), and in computer-generated animations of network activity (Fig. 5Bi).2 Interestingly, these animations
revealed that, at any given moment, all neurons that were
firing in phase form a coherent, moving patch of activity,
or “traveling wave,” that swept across the network. This
suggests that the spindle rhythmicity observed in the
average firing activity of neurons in the network is a
reflection of coherent waves of activity that recur on
every cycle of the oscillation (Fig. 5Bii). Both rotating
and spiral waves were observed (97) (see also Ref. 23; see
below).
Spatiotemporal analysis also revealed that the coherence of the oscillations fluctuated with time. The network
alternated between periods of high and low synchronization between the activity of the RE cells, which translated
into waxing-and-waning patterns of oscillations in the
average activity of the network (Fig. 5Bii). This pattern of
activity was consistent with the waxing-and-waning field
potentials recorded extracellularly in the RE nucleus after
deafferentation (308) (Fig. 5A). The model therefore predicts that the type of waxing and waning observed in the
RE nucleus is not due solely to intrinsic cellular properties but is associated with spatiotemporal patterns of
coherent waves that continuously form and dissolve (97).
Different patterns of connectivity between RE cells
affected the patterns of oscillations in RE network models. When RE cells were connected globally (all-to-all
coupling), the networks displayed synchronized oscillations in only two cases (135): when interactions were
GABAB mediated and when GABAA synapses had a reversal potential around rest (“shunting” synapses). However,
the oscillations had frequencies Ͻ6 Hz in both cases.
Partial synchrony was observed at higher frequencies
(ϳ10 Hz) when the properties of the neurons were randomized (135). GABAA-mediated waxing-and-waning oscillations at 10 Hz with partial with synchrony at 10 Hz, as
observed in experiments, were obtained in another model
(97). These GABAA-mediated oscillations were generated
by mutual inhibition-rebound sequences in RE cells,
which arose from the interactions between the ITs and
GABAA currents. They were robust to changes in connectivity, connection strength, and network size, provided

2
Computer-generated animations of the membrane voltage are
available at http://cns.iaf.cnrs-gif.fr or http://www.salk.edu/ϳalain.

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

tory interactions, and the synchrony of the oscillations
was due to dense interconnections between RE cells (90).
The rebound burst properties of RE cells were based on
the data available at that time (14, 208, 228). Two-dimensional networks of RE cells were investigated, in which
each RE neuron was densely connected with its neighbors within some diameter. Anatomical studies show that
RE cells are connected through GABAergic dendro-dendritic synapses over a significant distance (83, 252, 368).
In addition, the axons emanating from RE cells give rise
to collaterals in the RE nucleus before projecting to relay
nuclei (174, 252, 368). As these collaterals generally extend over distances greater than the size of the dendritic
tree, a given RE cell probably receives inputs from cells
outside its immediate neighborhood. Under these conditions, the network generated synchronized oscillations at
a frequency of ϳ7 Hz (90). Unlike models with slow
inhibition, this fast-inhibition model did not generate fully
synchronized oscillations. Instead, the neurons in the network had phases distributed around zero, and the average
membrane potential displayed oscillations reflecting the
synchrony of the population.
Experiments have demonstrated that RE cells interact through GABAA-mediated interactions. This was first
suggested by the strong effects of GABAA agonists in
slices of the RE nucleus (17, 164, 227, 291). Intracellular
recordings of RE cells later revealed the presence of fast
hyperpolarizing IPSPs in vivo (97), which were shown to
be GABAA mediated in vitro (21, 265, 266, 280, 336, 372).
In some preparations, the GABAA-mediated currents between RE cells have slower kinetics compared with TC
cells (337), although still far from the slow time course of
GABAB currents. These data revealed the ingredients necessary for the fast inhibition hypothesis. However, a lowamplitude postsynaptic GABAB component was detected
in some cases (336), and gap junctions were recently
identified between RE neurons in mouse thalamic slices
(189), suggesting that the spectrum of interaction between RE cells is more complex than pure GABAA-mediated inhibition.

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

Physiol Rev • VOL

tions between some RE neurons (189). The possibility
that electrical interactions also participate in generating
synchronized oscillations should be investigated in future
models.
C. Models of the TC-RE Pacemaker
1. Elementary TC-RE oscillator
The observation of spindle waves in different thalamic slice preparations (20, 21, 170, 346, 351) (Fig. 6A) as
well as in rat thalamocortical slices (322) suggests that
oscillations are generated by an interaction between TC
and RE cells. The synaptic interactions are AMPA (from
TC3 RE) and a mixture of GABAA and GABAB (from
RE3 TC) (346). The kinetics of the synaptic currents
mediating these interactions, combined in a model with
the intrinsic properties of TC and RE cells, are sufficient
to account for spindle oscillations at the correct frequency. The simplest TC-RE oscillator circuit consists of
one TC interconnected with one RE cell. This model
generated 8- to 10-Hz spindle oscillations separated by
silent periods of 8 – 40 s (105). The bursts of activity in the
TC and RE cells were mirror images, as observed experimentally in anesthetized cats (310), in the whole brain in
vitro (236), as well as in ferret thalamic slices (346). The
spindle oscillations began in the TC cell in a manner
similar to the waxing-and-waning slow oscillations of isolated TC cells. The first burst of spikes in the TC cell
elicited a series of EPSPs, which activated ITs in the RE
cell. The RE cell started bursting and entrained the TC
cell to 8 –10 Hz, but the excitatory feedback from the TC
cell was necessary to maintain this rhythmicity. At each
cycle of the oscillation, the Ca2ϩ-mediated upregulation
of Ih shifted its voltage activation curve. The oscillations
in the circuit terminated by the same mechanism that
caused the slow oscillations in isolated TC cells to wane
(see sect. IIA7).
2. Oscillations generated by TC-RE networks
The model above shows that spindle oscillations can
be generated in a simple network model, but two features
of the oscillation were not consistent with experiments.
The first is that the TC cell spontaneously began to oscillate, but both TC and RE cells stop oscillating if their
interconnections are cut (346). Second, the TC cell in the
model rebounded on every cycle of the spindle oscillation, but skipping and “subharmonic bursting” is observed
in intracellular recordings of TC cells during spindle oscillations (8, 20, 236, 310, 346) (see LGNd cell in Fig. 6A).
Because RE cells receive barrages of EPSPs at ϳ10 Hz
from several TC cells (21), the population of TC cells may
still generate a 10-Hz output although individual cells do

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

that the IPSPs were strong enough to deinactivate the IT
and evoke rebound bursts. Oscillations were not dependent on currents such as ICAN, IK(Ca), or the details of the
kinetics of fast IPSPs. However, they critically depended
on the membrane potential (see below). Thus, although
these two different models (97, 135) differed in details
such as connectivity and the kinetics of the currents, both
found that RE cells connected with GABAA synapses can
show synchronized (or partially synchronized) oscillations at 10 Hz.
Another type of model of the reticular nucleus is
based on depolarizing interactions between RE cells (23).
The (chloride) reversal potential for GABAA IPSPs is generally more depolarized in RE cells compared with TC
cells (265, 337) and in some preparations it was reported
to be as high as Ϫ70 mV, which is depolarized compared
with the resting potential of RE neurons (337). In contrast, other preparations showed that fast IPSPs in RE
cells are hyperpolarizing (21, 97, 265, 266, 280, 336, 372).
The effect of depolarizing GABAA IPSPs on RE cells was
tested using computational models of two-dimensional
networks of RE cells (23). When the RE cells were resting
at around Ϫ80 mV, the network displayed slow synchronized oscillations at a frequency of ϳ2.5 Hz, consisting of
synchronous bursts of action potentials triggered by the
depolarizing IPSPs between RE cells. When RE cells had
a more depolarized resting level (just below the GABAA
reversal potential), the network showed oscillations at a
higher frequency of ϳ9 Hz. In this case, individual cells
oscillated at ϳ4.5 Hz, and the population activity showed
oscillations at ϳ9 Hz. As in the other RE models, sustained oscillatory behavior was accompanied by spatiotemporal traveling waves of activity. The periodicity of
the spiral-like waves was related to the frequency of
oscillation of the network.
In another model (326), spindle oscillations in thalamic and thalamocortical circuits arose from the pacemaker role of the RE nucleus. In this model, as in others,
oscillations occurred among RE cells through their rebound burst properties and fast GABAergic interactions.
However, this model could not generate oscillations with
frequencies higher than 5 Hz. The possibility that higher
frequency complex spatiotemporal patterns may emerge
was not tested.
In summary, the known intrinsic voltage- and calciumdependent currents in RE neurons, combined with their
patterns of interconnectivity and synaptic interactions
through GABAergic receptors, could account for the generation of oscillations in the spindle frequency range, and
some models could also account for the waxing-and-waning envelope. These models were different in detail (23,
97, 135), but all consistently showed that the reticular
nucleus can generate ϳ10-Hz oscillations, consistent with
in vivo observations in the deafferented RE nucleus (308).
A recent study demonstrated the presence of gap junc-

1417

1418

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

3
Heterogeneity was created by randomizing the values of the Ih
conductance, such that the majority of TC cells was resting around Ϫ60
mV, while only a small minority were spontaneous oscillators, similar to
the proportion found in vitro (191). This minority served as “initiators”
of the oscillation in the entire network.

Physiol Rev • VOL

3. Traveling patterns of spindle waves in vitro
Spindle waves in ferret thalamic slices show systematically propagating traveling waves in the dorsal-ventral
axis (182) (Fig. 7A). A spindle started by the spontaneous
discharge of either TC or RE cells and propagated through
the recruitment of adjacent cells through localized axonal
projections. Andersen and Andersson (8) proposed a similar progressive recruiting mechanism based on local interactions between TC cells and inhibitory interneurons
rather than RE cells. Models in which TC and RE cells
formed topographically connected local networks (119,
138, 174, 232, 268) could reproduce the traveling spindle
waves (96, 136) (Fig. 7B). The oscillation started at one
site and propagated by recruiting more TC and RE cells
on each cycle of the oscillation. The velocity of the propagation was directly proportional to the extent of the
axonal projections (136). Similar results were found with
different sets of parameters as long as the connectivity
was topographically organized. The average propagation
delay between two neighboring neurons was ϳ19.4 ms. If
the fan-out of the projections between the TC and RE
cells in the model (11 neurons) is assumed to be equivalent to 200 ␮m in the slice, then the velocity in the model
is ϳ1.03 mm/s for spindles, within the 0.28 –1.21 mm/s
range observed experimentally.
Models that incorporated the waxing-and-waning
properties of individual TC cells (96) produced propagating patterns similar to the propagating patterns of spindles found in vitro (182) (Fig. 7A). The “waxing” propagated as more and more cells were recruited. Similarly,
the “waning” also propagated, as TC cells progressively
lost their ability to participate in rebound bursting activity. The resulting pattern had the appearance of “waves”
of oscillatory activity propagating through the network,
and separated by periods of quiescence for 15–25 s.
4. Dynamic clamp reconstruction of the
TC-RE oscillator
A powerful technique to test predictions from modeling studies is to build a system that includes computer
simulations coupled with real recordings. In the dynamic
clamp technique (261, 276, 277), ionic conductances in the
simulation are injected in a real neuron through the intracellular electrode. It is also possible to simulate an entire
neuron, simulating synaptic inputs when the recorded cell
fires, and, when the simulated neuron fires, inject the
appropriate synaptic currents into the recorded cell (193,
194, 259, 367). Another variant is to provide artificial
synaptic connections between simultaneously recorded
cells, by identifying spikes in each cell and injecting an
artificially generated current into the companion cell
(275). With these hybrid techniques it is possible to study
phenomena arising from the interaction between different
types of cells, such as of spindle rhythmicity, and test the

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

not fire on every cycle. These features were explored in
network models (96, 136, 353) (see below).
The subharmonic bursting of TC cells during spindle
oscillations depends on the type of receptor, the IPSP
conductance, and the frequency of stimulation. Repetitive
stimulation of GABAA receptors at 10 Hz in a TC cell
showed that subharmonic bursting is observed only when
the strength of the GABAA conductances is weak or moderate (96). Computational models of thalamic networks
investigated the genesis of spindle oscillations with subharmonic bursting in TC cells (96, 136, 353). The models
showed that spindle oscillations arise in these networks
with different bursting frequency at the single-cell level,
but the population oscillated at ϳ10 Hz. The minimal
system for this type of oscillation consisted of a circuit of
two TC and two RE cells (96) which generated oscillations at 10 Hz, but TC cells produced bursts in alternation
once every two cycles, such that their combined output
was 10 Hz. This type of dynamics is illustrated in Figure
6B for larger networks. RE cells generated repetitive
bursts at around the spindle frequency (ϳ6 –7 Hz in this
case), but TC cells produced subharmonic bursting and
fired bursts at a lower frequency (ϳ1.5–2 Hz). Similar
findings were obtained in several computational models
of thalamic networks (96, 136, 353).
The mechanisms underlying subharmonic bursting,
investigated earlier (185), are due to an interaction between IPSPs with IT and Ih in TC cells (352, 353). For
strong GABAA conductances, models of TC cells do not
produce subharmonic bursting and can follow 10-Hz
IPSPs, similar to the two-cell TC-RE model of spindles
(105). This situation is not atypical, because some TC
cells do not display subharmonic bursting. For example,
intralaminar TC cells typically burst on every cycle of
spindle oscillations (304). Strong GABAA conductances
could explain the patterns of spindling in these cells.
In larger network models of interconnected TC and
RE cells, the properties of the spindle oscillations were
consistent with all the experiments (96). Spontaneous
waxing-and-waning oscillations were only present if upregulation of Ih was included, and if TC cells had heterogeneous intrinsic properties,3 consistent with experiments (191). A simpler model of the TC-RE network, in
which cells did not include action potentials, also generated 8- to 12-Hz oscillations with mirror image and correct
phase relations between cells, subharmonic bursting, and
propagating patterns of activity (136) (see below and also
Ref. 353).

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

1419

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 7. Propagation of spindle waves in isolated thalamic networks. A: propagating spindle waves in ferret thalamic
slices. Left: drawing of a sagittal ferret dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN) slice with an array of 8 multiunit electrodes
arranged in lamina A. Electrodes were separated by 250– 400 ␮m, extending over 2–3 mm in the dorsoventral axis. Right:
example of a propagating spindle wave. The spindle wave started in the dorsal end of the slice and propagated ventrally. Each
spindle wave consisted of waxing-and-waning rhythmic action potential bursts with interburst frequency of 6–10 Hz. [Modified
from Kim et al. (182).] B: propagating spindle oscillations in a network of thalamocortical and thalamic reticular cells.
i: Schematic diagram of connectivity of a one-dimensional network of TC and RE cells with localized axonal projections.
ii: Membrane potential of 8 RE cells equally spaced in the network during spindle oscillations. iii: Membrane potential
of 8 TC cells equally space in the network (same simulation as in ii). [ii and iii modified from Golomb et al. (136).]

Physiol Rev • VOL

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

1420

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

role of individual conductances, of synaptic or voltagedependent type. The key is to use models that can be
simulated in real time, while maintaining a sufficient degree
of realism, which has only become possible with the availability of powerful digital computers in the laboratory.
The TC-RE oscillator has been investigated using
hybrid recordings (193). The single-compartment models
described above were used with minor modifications. In
the first setup, a real RE cell was recorded and connected
to an artificial TC cell (Fig. 8A). In a second setup, a real
TC cell was recorded and connected to an artificial RE
cell (Fig. 8B). In both cases, ϳ10-Hz spindle oscillations
were obtained from the interacting real-artificial pair,
even though none of the cells was spontaneous oscillators. The oscillation observed resembled that found in
model two-neuron circuits (105). This hybrid approach
provides a clear demonstration that spindle oscillations
can be generated by interacting TC and RE cells, confirming earlier modeling studies.

The models demonstrate that the voltage-dependent
currents generating the intrinsic properties of thalamic
cells and the type of synaptic receptors mediating their
synaptic interactions are consistent with properties of spin-

FIG. 8. Reconstruction of spindle waves from hybrid thalamic circuits. Thalamic neurons were recorded intracellularly in ferret thalamic slices and were coupled to computational models in real time. A: intracellularly recorded
thalamic reticular neuron (nRt/PGN) coupled to a model thalamic relay cell (TC). Synaptic interactions were mediated
by AMPA receptors (from TC to nRt/PGN) and GABAA receptors (from nRt/PGN to TC) and were simulated using the
dynamic-clamp technique. B: intracellularly recorded thalamic relay neuron (TC) coupled to a model thalamic reticular
cell (nRt/PGN) using a similar coupling procedure. In both cases, oscillations in the spindle frequency range emerged
from these circuits, although none of the cells was a spontaneous oscillator. The oscillations waxed and waned due to
calcium-mediated upregulation of Ih in the TC cell. Models were single-compartment modifications from Ref. 105.
[Modified from LeMasson et al. (193).]

Physiol Rev • VOL

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

D. Reconciling Different Pacemaker Mechanisms

dle generation, both by TC-RE circuits and by the isolated
RE nucleus. However, an explanation is still needed for
why the isolated RE nucleus does not show spontaneous
oscillations in vitro (14, 21, 165, 351, 346). Possible reasons for this discrepancy (312) include the possibility that
the RE nucleus was not completely deafferented in the in
vivo experiments or that there are too few interconnected
RE cells in the slice to sustain oscillations.
Another possible explanation for this discrepancy is
a different state of neuromodulation of RE cells (98). One
major difference in the thalamus between the slice preparation and the living brain is that there is a tonic level of
activity in neuromodulatory pathways in vivo, including
acetylcholine (ACh), norepinephrine (NE), and serotonin
(5-HT). These pathways densely innervate thalamic nuclei, and the release of neuromodulators alters channel
conductances and the resting level of thalamic neurons
(222). In particular, ACh was shown to affect the firing
pattern of RE cells by activating a leak Kϩ current (227),
whereas NE and 5-HT depolarize thalamic cells by blocking a leak Kϩ current (228).
The effects of neuromodulators on networks of RE
cells were examined with computational models to help
understand why spontaneously oscillations are observed
in vivo but not in vitro (98). The histology in vivo showed
that the rostral pole of the RE nucleus was perfectly

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

1421

isolated from the dorsal thalamus and the cerebral cortex,
but projections of the most ventral fibers arising from the
brain stem could reach the RE nucleus as well as the basal
forebrain, which was still present in the isolated island
(308). These fibers may constitute the noradrenergic projections from the raphe nucleus and locus coeruleus, as
well as glutamatergic projections from various forebrain
areas. It is therefore plausible that a reduced, but not
entirely suppressed, neuromodulatory drive was still
present in these experiments, bringing the RE neurons to
more depolarized levels consistent with oscillations.
If the resting membrane potential of RE neurons in
the model were adjusted to that typically observed in vitro
(Ϫ65 to Ϫ80 mV), then networks of interconnected RE
neurons could not sustain oscillations because the resting
level was too close to the reversal potential of GABAA
currents. On the other hand, simulating the depolarizing
action of neuromodulators such as NE or 5-HT, by blocking ϳ20% of the leak Kϩ currents, depolarized RE cells
between Ϫ60 and Ϫ70 mV. This value was closer to the
resting level observed in vivo (59). Under these conditions, the RE network showed waxing-and-waning oscillations as described in section IIIB, even though the intrinPhysiol Rev • VOL

sic bursting properties of RE neurons were not affected
(98). Incorporating NE/5-HT synapses and their effect on
leak Kϩ channels showed that a network of RE cells can
be switched from oscillatory mode to silent mode by
controlling these synapses (Fig. 9). This behavior was
robust to changes in parameters; the critical parameter
was the reversal potential of GABAergic currents (98).
The need for a depolarized level to sustain oscillations in the RE is compatible with reports of the presence
of gap junctions between RE neurons (189). Symmetric
electrical interactions between RE cells could be particularly effective in generating synchronized oscillations,
but only if the resting level of RE cells is sufficiently
depolarized. With depolarized rest close to threshold,
spikes from one RE cell could in principle induce spikes
directly in other electrically coupled RE cells.4 Several

4
It is also conceivable that RE cells coupled through gap junctions
could induce bursts in each other if their resting level is hyperpolarized
enough to deinactivate the IT. In this case, oscillations should be observed in slices of the RE nucleus, where the level of RE cells is typically
very hyperpolarized (see, for example, Ref. 337). Such oscillations have,
however, never been reported.

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 9. Neuromodulation can explain why networks of RE cells spontaneously oscillate in vivo but not in vitro.
Simulation of a network with 100 RE cells locally interconnected through GABAA synapses. Oscillations were possible
only if RE cells had a sufficiently depolarized resting membrane potential (about Ϫ65 mV in this case), close to in vivo
measurements. This depolarization was provided here using kinetic models of the block of Kϩ conductances by
noradrenergic/serotonergic (NE/5-HT) neuromodulatory synapses. In the absence of this neuromodulatory drive, leak Kϩ
conductances were fully activated, and the resting level of RE cells was more hyperpolarized (Ϫ75 mV in this case), close
to in vitro measurements. In this case, the network of RE cells was unable to sustain oscillations. The figure shows the
transition between these two states: NE/5-HT synapses were initially active, as in vivo, allowing the network to display
waxing-and-waning oscillations at a frequency of 10 –16 Hz. After 2 s (first arrow), all NE/5-HT synaptic activity was
suppressed; the resulting hyperpolarization prevented the network from sustaining oscillations. Depolarizing (second
arrow) or hyperpolarizing (third arrow) current pulses injected simultaneously in all neurons (with random amplitude)
could not restore spontaneous oscillations. This latter situation may correspond to the conditions of RE cells in vitro.
[Modified from Destexhe et al. (98).]

1422

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

different factors, such as mutual GABAA synapses and
symmetric electrical coupling, may cooperate in generating oscillations in networks of depolarized RE cells.
The presence of a weak neuromodulatory drive may
explain why the isolated RE nucleus oscillates in vivo but
not in vitro. The model predicts that spontaneous sustained oscillations should be observed in slices of the RE
nucleus if the resting level of RE cells could be brought to
more depolarized values and the connections between RE
cells in the slice were sufficiently strong. This could be
achieved by bath application of NE/5-HT agonists at low
concentrations to depolarize all RE neurons to the Ϫ60 to
Ϫ70 mV range. Another prediction is that NE/5-HT antagonists should suppress oscillatory behavior in the isolated
RE nucleus in vivo. The same results should also be found
in other models of networks of inhibitory neurons displaying rebound bursts (135, 355) or in models incorporating
gap junctions.

The pacemaker behavior of thalamic networks gives
this region of the brain autonomy, but these thalamic
models need to be scaled up in size and integrated into
models for other brain systems. This leads to the problem
of understanding the often highly complex behaviors that
occur in vivo, and how to reconcile this behavior with the
data obtained in reduced preparations or isolated networks maintained in vitro (297). We review here largescale network behavior, such as coherent activity in the
cortex, synchronized oscillations in unconnected thalamic and cortical areas, and pathological states such as
epileptic seizures. We show that key to reconciling results
from different preparations is the prominent role of corticothalamic projections, from which a unified framework
emerges that explains the genesis of normal and pathological behavior.
A. The Large-Scale Synchrony
of Slow-Wave Oscillations
1. Experimental characterization
of large-scale synchrony
A consistent feature of oscillations recorded in vivo
during slow-wave sleep or anesthesia is their high level of
synchrony (8, 61, 102). This high coherence is also present
in the human EEG during sleep (see Ref. 61 and references therein). Spindle oscillations are coherent across
broad regions of the central, parietal, and occipital corti-

Physiol Rev • VOL

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

IV. THALAMOCORTICAL PACEMAKERS:
CONTROL AND SYNCHRONIZATION
OF OSCILLATIONS FROM
INTERACTING NETWORKS

ces. A similar high level of coherence is found in EEG
recordings from the suprasylvian cortex of naturally
sleeping cats.
Andersen and Andersson (8) extended their model of
a thalamic pacemaker and proposed that the large-scale
synchrony observed in cortical systems could be generated by “distributor” TC cells, which would connect different thalamic nuclei by intrathalamic excitatory axon
collaterals (8). According to this view, spindling could
start in any thalamic neuron and be transmitted to inhibitory interneurons through intranuclear recurrent collaterals; these in turn would project IPSPs back to the TC
neurons, which would fire rebound spike bursts at the
offset of the IPSPs. This mechanism explicitly predicted
propagating patterns of spindle oscillations through the
thalamus and consequently through the cortex (8, 11) by
progressive recruitment through intrathalamic axonal
projections, consistent with earlier experimental observations (345) and more recent observations in thalamic
slices (182).
According to this thalamocentric view, not only does
the thalamus generate oscillations, but it also serves to
synchronize large-scale cortical activity. Recent experiments suggest that although the thalamus is important for
initiating spindle activity, the cortex is itself actively engaged in generating large-scale synchrony. Multisite recordings from the thalamus of intact and decorticate cats
have confirmed that spindle waves are highly synchronous in the thalamus within the intact brain, but revealed
that this large-scale synchrony was lost after removing the
cortex (60) (Fig. 10A). Without the cortex, the thalamus
still generated spindle oscillations, in agreement with the
well-known thalamic origin of these oscillations (234, 305,
346), but the different thalamic sites oscillated quasiindependently (Fig. 10A). Subsequent experiments confirmed that the loss of the cortical influence on the thalamus was responsible for this loss of thalamic coherence
(60). First, intracellularly recorded thalamic cells in the
decorticate preparation all showed typical features of
spindle oscillations. Second, dual intracellular recordings
in the decorticate thalamus demonstrated that closely
spaced electrodes (ϳ1 mm) displayed highly synchronized oscillations, consistent with the intactness of the
local thalamic synchronizing mechanisms, but synchrony
was lost for larger intrathalamic distances. Third, the
large-scale synchrony was still present after deep coronal
cuts in cortex, suggesting that horizontal cortico-cortical
connections were not necessary.
Thus the cortex is not passively driven by the thalamus and plays an active role in generating large-scale
synchrony, which depends on a functional connectivity
between cortex and thalamus.

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

1423

Physiol Rev • VOL

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 10. The large-scale synchrony of spindle oscillations depends on corticothalamic
feedback. A: removal of the cerebral cortex affects the pattern of spindle oscillations in the
thalamus. Field potentials were recorded using
8 tungsten electrodes equidistant of 1 mm (Th1Th6) inserted in the cat thalamus under barbiturate anesthesia in the intact brain (Intact) and
after removal of the cortex (Decorticated). After decortication, recordings from approximately the same thalamic location showed that
spindling continued at each electrode site, but
their coincidence in time was lost. The 8-electrode configuration was positioned at different
depths within the thalamus (from Ϫ2 to Ϫ6)
and different lateral planes (from 2 to 5); all
positions gave the same result. [Modified from
Contreras et al. (60).] B: computational model
of large-scale coherence in the thalamocortical
system. Spontaneous spindles are shown in the
presence of the cortex (left panels) and in an
isolated thalamic network (right panels) under
the same conditions. The traces indicate local
averages computed from 21 adjacent TC cells
sampled from 8 equally spaced sites on the network. Bottom graphs represent averages of a
representative spindle at 10 times higher temporal resolution. The near-simultaneity of oscillations in the presence of the cortex is qualitatively different from the propagating patterns of
activity in the isolated thalamic network (arrows). [Modified from Destexhe et al. (100).]

1424

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

2. Mechanisms underlying large-scale synchrony
in the thalamocortical system

FIG. 11. “Inhibitory dominance” of corticothalamic feedback on thalamic relay cells. A: intracellular recording of a
TC cell in the lateral posterior (LP) thalamic nucleus while stimulating the anatomically related part of the suprasylvian
cortex in cats during barbiturate anesthesia. Cortical stimulation (arrow) evoked a small excitatory postsynaptic
potential (EPSP) followed by a powerful biphasic inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP). The IPSP gave rise to a
rebound burst in the TC cell. This example was representative of the majority of recorded TC cells. B: simulation of
cortical EPSPs (AMPA-mediated) in a circuit of 4 interconnected thalamic cells. Cortical EPSPs were stimulated by
delivering a presynaptic burst of 4 spikes at 200 Hz to AMPA receptors. The maximal conductance was similar in TC and
RE cells (100 nS in this case), and no rebound occurred after the stimulation (arrow). C: simulation of dominant IPSP
in TC cell. In this example, the AMPA conductance of stimulated EPSPs in the TC cell was reduced to 5 nS. The
stimulation of AMPA receptors evoked a weak EPSP followed by strong IPSP, then by a rebound burst in the TC cells,
as observed experimentally. [Modified from Destexhe et al. (100).]

Physiol Rev • VOL

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

A thalamocortical network model was developed to
explain these observations. The model consisted of the
thalamic network as described in section IVA and a onedimensional representation of cortical layer 6, whose neurons are the major source of corticothalamic projections,
and which receives collaterals from ascending thalamocortical fibers, thus forming monosynaptic loops (149,
358). With the use of this model (see details of connectivity and receptor types in Ref. 100), the cortical oscillations were highly synchronized in the presence of the
corticothalamic loops (Fig. 10B, thalamus with cortex),
but this large-scale synchrony was lost if cortical cells
were removed (Fig. 10B, isolated thalamic network).
To reproduce the large-scale synchronized oscillations observed in vivo, it was necessary for the corticothalamic projections in the model to recruit thalamic relay
cells predominantly through inhibition (100). This inhibitory dominance might seem surprising since corticothalamic fibers have excitatory synaptic terminals on TC
cells (174). However, corticothalamic fibers also excite
RE cells, which mediate feedforward IPSP onto TC cells.
Intracellular recordings of TC cells in response to stimulating the anatomically related cortical area typically
show an EPSP-IPSP sequence dominated by the IPSP
component (Fig. 11A). In the model, cortical simulation
reproduced the EPSP/IPSP sequences observed experimentally in the thalamus only if cortical EPSPs on RE
cells were stronger than the EPSPs on TC cells (see Fig.
11B). If the conductance of AMPA-mediated cortical drive
on TC and RE cells as well as the GABAA-mediated IPSP
from RE cells were of the same order of magnitude,
cortical EPSPs were shunted by reticular IPSPs, and cortical stimulation did not evoke oscillations in the thalamic
circuit (Fig. 11B). The EPSP-IPSP sequence in the model
resembled intracellular recordings, and cortical stimulation was effective in evoking oscillations when the cortical conductances of the EPSPs on TC cells were at least
5–20 times smaller than those on RE cells (88, 100) (Fig.
11C).
The dominance of inhibition in corticothalamic interactions is supported by a large body of experimental data.

The fact that the strong IPSP component is mediated by
RE cells is consistent with the high sensitivity of these
cells to cortical EPSPs; even low stimulus intensities
evoke bursts in RE cells in vivo (59, 237) and in vitro
(328). Inhibitory dominance has also been reported in
recordings of thalamic relay neurons after stimulation of
the corresponding cortical areas (4, 45, 66, 82, 196, 263,
315, 330, 359). In vitro experiments are also consistent
with a dominance of inhibition; stimulation of the internal
capsule in thalamic slices (328) or cortical stimulation in
thalamocortical slices (177) produced EPSP-IPSP sequences dominated by inhibition in a significant proportion of the recorded TC cells. In agreement with these
observations, the majority of excitatory synapses on RE
cells are from cerebral cortex (198), and the number of
glutamate receptors and the conductances of these synapses were approximately three to four times larger in RE
cells compared with that of cortical synapses on TC cells
(137). Perhaps the strongest evidence for inhibitory dominance was provided by Descheˆ nes and Hu (82), who
compared the effect of corticothalamic feedback before
and after lesion or inactivation of the thalamic reticular
nucleus. The “IPSP-dominant” cortical feedback was
transformed into “EPSP-dominant” feedback after functional disconnection of the RE nucleus (82).
Why does inhibitory dominance promote large-scale
synchrony in the thalamocortical system? A possible
mechanism is shown in Figure 12 (100). In the isolated
thalamus, the topographic structure of intrathalamic connections favors local propagation phenomena (Fig. 12A).
Oscillations initiated at a given site (asterisk in Fig. 12A)
recruit progressively larger areas of the thalamus at each
cycle, through divergent TC-RE projections (see sect.
IIIC3). In the presence of the cortex, initiation sites in the
thalamus (asterisk in Fig. 12B) recruit first cortical neurons, and if the cortical feedback is inhibitory dominant,
cortical discharges then recruit first RE neurons and consequently TC cells through IPSPs. During thalamo-cortico-reticulo-thalamic recruitment, a cascade of divergent
axonal projection systems are activated (TC-to-CX, CXto-RE, RE-to-TC). These thalamocortical loops are highly
efficient at generating large-scale synchrony during oscil-

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

lations because each cycle through the loop recruits a
large area of cortical or thalamic tissue.
Other factors may also enhance large-scale synchrony between thalamic areas that have no direct connection. Computational models suggest that the refracto-

1425

riness of thalamic circuits, as observed in vitro (182), may
serve to phase set thalamocortical activity (100). If unconnected thalamic nuclei end their period of refractoriness at roughly the same time, the initiation of activity in
these areas may occur simultaneous and further promote

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

Physiol Rev • VOL

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

1426

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

large-scale synchrony. This mechanism was modeled by
Ca2ϩ-dependent modulation of Ih in TC cells (100), similar
to the way that it was modeled in isolated thalamic cells
(see sect. IIA7). In networks with randomly distributed Ih
conductance in TC cells, different initiation sites “synchronized” because all TC cells had the same refractory
period (see details in Ref. 100). The length of the refractory period depends on biochemical rate constants that
may be similar in all TC cells that possess this mechanism. In vivo experiments have demonstrated that thaPhysiol Rev • VOL

3. Traveling patterns of spindle waves in vivo
In contrast to the large-scale synchrony observed in
intact brains (Fig. 10A, intact), the isolated thalamus displays traveling waves (Fig. 7A). Traveling patterns were
also observed by Verzeano and Negishi (344, 345) in early
studies in the thalamus in vivo using multiple extracellular recordings. In the intact brain, the interelectrode distance was 1 mm, and the recorded area of the thalamus
was ϳ7 mm, which nearly covers the entire anterior-

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 12. Proposed mechanisms for large-scale synchrony. A: reciprocal recruitment of thalamocortical (TC) relay cells and thalamic reticular (RE) cells synchronize cells in the isolated thalamus. From an
initial discharge of a TC cell (1; asterisk), a localized area of RE cells
was recruited (2), which in turn recruited a larger neighboring TC cells
(3), and so forth. Progressively larger areas of the thalamus were recruited on each successive cycle (4, 5, 6,. . .) through the topographic
structure of the connectivity. An array or electrodes would record
propagating oscillations, as found in thalamic slices (181). B: thalamic
recruitment mechanism involving the cortex. Two approximately simultaneous initiation sites in the thalamus (1a, 1b) recruited localized
cortical areas (2b, 2c), which in turn recruited the connected areas of
the RE nucleus (3a, 3b), which in turn recruited larger areas of TC cells
(4a, 4b), etc. At the next cycle, the entire cortical area was recruited (5).
The corticothalamic connections overshadowed the local thalamic recruitment mechanisms shown in A, and oscillations achieved large-scale
synchrony within a few cycles, consistent with in vivo data (63). [Modified from Destexhe et al. (100).]

lamic refractoriness is visible from oscillations evoked by
cortical stimulation (61). Oscillations could be evoked by
cortical stimulation only after a 2- to 8-s period of silence,
depending on stimulation intensity (61), and similar results were found in the thalamocortical model (100).
These experiments and models suggest that thalamic refractoriness allows the network to “learn” large-scale synchrony by setting these mechanisms in phase in different
thalamic nuclei.
Other synchronizing factors were proposed and
tested by computational models. These include the synchronizing role of the long-range connections from RE to
TC (288), which were not taken into account by other
thalamic models, or a synchronized activity intrinsic to
the RE network (24), which may also help synchronizing
thalamocortical oscillations.
Another factor that promotes large-scale synchrony
is the contribution of cortico-cortical fibers. Because
trans-callosal fibers are myelinated and are fast-conducting, trans-callosal interhemispheric interactions may promote large-scale synchrony. Indeed, interhemispheric
synchrony was diminished following callosal sections in
cats (41). Recent experiments have shown that interhemispheric synchrony is larger than intrahemispheric synchrony in absencelike seizures in rats (231). The contribution of cortico-cortical interactions is examined in section IVA4.
Although the large-scale synchrony of thalamocortical spindle oscillations has not been the focus of investigation in other computational models, such models have
also been used to investigate other related issues. In a
model circuit comprising cortical and thalamic cells, transitions between spindle and delta sleep rhythms were
obtained by modulating leak Kϩ conductances in RE cells
(323). Interestingly, this model predicted a synchronizing
role for the RE neurons during the delta rhythm, through
slow GABAB-mediated IPSPs, which synchronized TC
cells in their intrinsic delta oscillation. In another model
(326), spindling was generated inside the RE nucleus, but
a thalamocortical network comprising such a pacemaker
could only generate oscillations at low frequencies (ϳ5
Hz). Spindle rhythms were also modeled using continuum-based approaches (188, 364), or by simple cortical
neuronal networks driven by a thalamic pacemaker (89).

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

4. The contribution of cortico-cortical connectivity
to large-scale coherence
The evidence presented above suggests that the
large-scale synchrony of spindle oscillations arises from
the mutual interactions between cortex and thalamus.
These experiments were performed during barbiturate
anesthesia, which could be different in nonanesthetized
preparations. In early experiments, interhemispheric synchrony was reduced in cats following section of the corpus callosum (41), suggesting that at least some intracortical connections are important. This aspect was quantified in a series of studies that compared the patterns of
cortical spindles in natural sleep before and after artificial
depression of cortical activity (62, 102). During natural
sleep, spindle oscillations are characterized by a high
coherence and initiate almost simultaneously in cortical
sites up to 7 mm apart. Under barbiturate anesthesia, the
initiation is less precise, and signs of propagating activity
are visible in the first 500 ms of the oscillatory sequences.
Physiol Rev • VOL

Interestingly, similar patterns of imprecise initiation
could be reproduced during natural sleep after cortical
depression (102). These differences were also apparent in
spatiotemporal maps of activity as well as in patterns of
cross-correlations (102). Finally, it was observed that a
synchronous negative EEG deflection always precedes
spindles during natural sleep in cats, but is absent in
barbiturate anesthesia or when the cortex has been depressed (62). Taken together, these experiments suggest
that during natural sleep, the large-scale synchrony is
further enhanced by intracortical interactions.
A thalamocortical network model was proposed to
account for these observations (102). The hypothesis was
that spindles are more coherent during natural sleep because of higher cortical excitability due to neuromodulatory drive. In the early phases of natural sleep, during
which most spindles occur, the level of discharge of activating systems from brain stem, basal forebrain, and
posterior hypothalamus is still relatively high (311). The
model incorporated in vitro data (222) on the effect of
neuromodulators such as ACh, 5-HT, and NE on reducing
leak and voltage-dependent Kϩ currents. In control conditions, the model displayed coherence similar to that
observed during barbiturate spindles (see above), which
correspond to unaffected leak and Kϩ conductances, as
expected from states of low levels of neuromodulation
such as barbiturate anesthesia. When a downregulation of
these ion channels was simulated, representing the moderate neuromodulatory drive during early stages of sleep,
cortical excitatory neurons were depolarized and their
excitability was augmented. The spindle oscillations during this state of moderate downregulation showed highly
coherent patterns similar to those that occur during natural sleep. The augmented coherence was due to several
factors (102): 1) facilitation of the intracortical spread of
excitatory discharges, 2) augmented responsiveness of
cortical neurons to thalamic EPSPs, and 3) more powerful and more coherent feedback of the cortex to the
thalamus.
Models thus predict that highly coherent patterns of
oscillation in the cortex can be generated by cortexthalamus-cortex loops in which the excitability of cortical
neurons are enhanced due to partial downregulation of
their Kϩ channels by neuromodulators. Experiments and
models provide converging evidence that the cortex is
intimately involved in triggering and synchronizing oscillations generated in the thalamus through corticothalamic
feedback projections. If cortical excitability is further
augmented, the system may generate pathological activity, such as absence seizures, as analyzed below.
B. Pathological Behavior: Absence Seizures
The model of thalamocortical interactions that has
been developed for understanding spindle oscillations,

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

posterior axis of the cat thalamus. In Verzeano’s experiments, the electrodes covered a much smaller thalamic
area (30 –100 ␮m interelectrode distance). It is possible
for local traveling patterns to occur within a globally
synchronized network. Indeed, there is evidence for local
propagation between Th1-Th6 in Figure 10A, although the
spindle oscillations occurred approximately within the
same time window at all sites. Moreover, with the use of
the same electrode setup, propagating patterns of oscillations were found in the thalamus of decorticate cats in
vivo (61). The isolated thalamus has a tendency to generate traveling waves, but these oscillations quickly evolve
toward large-scale coherent patterns in the intact
thalamocortical system. Fine-scale recording from local
areas of the thalamus and measurements of the fine-time
structure of the initiation of the oscillation (see below)
might reveal wave propagation.
Evoked traveling waves have been observed in the
intact thalamocortical system using low-intensity electrical stimulation of the cortex (61). This stimulus typically
evoked oscillations that propagated away from the stimulation site. Distant recording sites began oscillating after
a delay proportional to the distance from the stimulation
site, but within the oscillation, all sites were synchronized. This type of propagating wave was seen both in
local field potentials and in multiunit activity (61). It was
not dependent on intracortical horizontal connections,
because a deep coronal cut did not affect the traveling
patterns (61), suggesting that they depend mainly on
thalamocortical loops. These observations were all reproduced in computational models (100), in which the stimulation activated a local cortical area, which progressively
recruited the entire network through successive corticothalamo-cortical loops.

1427

1428

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

without any additional mechanisms, also accounts for the
activity that occurs during pathological states, such as
some forms of spike-and-wave seizures. We discuss here
the experimental evidence that the thalamus is involved in
generating paroxysmal rhythms, and how models provide
insights into plausible network mechanisms for generating seizures, as well as possible ways to suppress them.
1. Thalamic and cortical contributions
to generalized seizures

Physiol Rev • VOL

2. The receptor types involved in seizure activity
The fact that GABAA antagonists are powerful convulsants shows that the inhibition mediated by GABAA
receptors is central in seizure generation. However, the
removal of GABAA inhibition cannot by itself explain the
oscillatory mechanism during seizure activity, and a series of experiments point to a critical role for GABAB
receptors as well in the genesis of spike-and-wave oscillations. First, GABAB agonists exacerbate seizures, while
GABAB antagonists diminish or suppress them in rats
(159, 257, 285, 286). Furthermore, blocking GABAB receptors in thalamic nuclei leads to the suppression of spikeand-wave seizures (200). Second, in rat thalamic slices,
the anti-absence drug clonazepam diminished GABABmediated inhibition in TC cells, reducing their tendency to
burst in synchrony (164). Clonazepam potentiates GABAA
receptors in the RE nucleus (128, 160, 164). Indeed, there

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

Absence or “petit-mal” seizures, which are particularly common in children, are spontaneous, generalized,
and accompanied by a brief loss of consciousness that
typically lasts a few seconds. High-amplitude spikes in the
EEG alternate with slow positive waves at a frequency of
ϳ3 Hz (241). These generalized “spike-and-wave” seizures
appear suddenly and invade the entire cerebral cortex
nearly simultaneously. Similar spike-and-wave EEG patterns are observed in other neurological disorders as well
as in experimental models of absence seizures in cats,
rats, mice, and monkeys.
The large-scale synchrony observed during absence
seizures and their sudden appearance suggest that they
are generated in a central structure projecting widely to
the cerebral cortex. The involvement of the thalamus in
spike-and-wave seizures was initially proposed by Jasper
and Kershman (173) and is now supported by several
findings. First, in simultaneous thalamic and cortical recordings in humans during absence attacks, thalamic participation was directly demonstrated (360). Second, thalamic activation in human absence seizures was observed
with positron emission tomography (255). Third, electrophysiological recordings in experimental models of spikeand-wave seizures support a strong thalamic involvement.
Cortical and thalamic cells fire prolonged discharges in
phase with the “spike” component, while the “wave” is
characterized by silence in all cell types (16, 48, 168, 229,
254, 273, 293, 294). Electrophysiological recordings also
indicate that spindle oscillations, which are generated by
thalamic circuits (see sect. IIIC), can be gradually transformed into spike-and-wave activity and that any intervention that promotes or antagonizes spindles has the
same effect on spike-and-wave oscillations (186, 187,
229). Finally, spike-and-wave patterns disappear following thalamic lesions or inactivation (15, 248, 341).
These observations suggest a direct involvement of
the thalamus in seizure activity. Other experiments, however, indicate that the cortex is also involved. Thalamic
injection of high doses of GABAA antagonists, such as
penicillin (130, 258) or bicuculline (302, 52), lead to highly
synchronized 3- to 4-Hz oscillations, but not to spike-andwave discharge. On the other hand, injection of the same
drugs into the cortex, without altering the thalamus, re-

sulted in full-blown spike-and-wave seizures (130, 302).
The threshold for epileptogenesis was extremely low in
the cortex compared with the thalamus (302). Finally, a
diffuse application of a dilute solution of penicillin to the
cortex produced spike-and-wave seizures although the
thalamus was intact (130) (Fig. 13A).
A form of spike-and-wave activity that is intracortically generated has been observed in cats. In seizures
occurring during ketamine-xylazine anesthesia, or in seizures induced by focal application of bicuculline to the
cortex, a large proportion (60%) of TC cells is steadily
hyperpolarized, suggesting few thalamic participation to
these seizures. Indeed, a slow type of spike and wave
(1.8 –2.5 Hz), with a less prominent “spike” component,
was recorded in the isolated cortex or athalamic preparations after administration of convulsants in cats (219,
248, 302). However, this type of intracortical spike and
wave appears not to occur in rats (341) and has never
been reported in neocortical slices. It has been argued
that these seizures may represent an experimental analog
of the “Lennox-Gastaud” syndrome (297), which also presents spike-and-wave or poly-spike-wave patterns similar
to these preparations. Further experiments are certainly
needed to characterize the differences between intracortical and thalamocortical spike-and-wave activity and explain why it appears in cats but not in rats.
In summary, some experimental models of absence
seizures suggest that spike-and-wave patterns typically
require both cortex and thalamus, whereas other experimental models show a type of slow spike-and-wave activity that is generated intracortically. It is difficult to know
where to begin to sort out the different mechanisms that
underlie these observations. Computational models have
proven to be quite helpful in exploring possible mechanisms underlying these different oscillations, as shown
below.

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

1429

is a diminished frequency of seizures following infusion of
GABAA receptor agonists in the RE nucleus in rats (199).
Third, in ferret thalamic slices, spindle oscillations can be
transformed into slower and more synchronized oscillations at ϳ3 Hz following block of GABAA receptors (346)
(Fig. 14A). This behavior is reminiscent of the gradual
transformation of spindles into the spike-and-wave discharges in cats found by Kostopoulos and co-workers
(186, 187). Similar to the spike-and-wave oscillations in
rats, the ϳ3-Hz paroxysmal oscillations in ferret thalamic
slices are suppressed by GABAB receptor antagonists
(346) (Fig. 14A).
Although GABAB receptors seem to play a crucial
role in seizures, there seems to be critical differences
between experimental models. In the cat penicillin model
of absence epilepsy, the spike-and-wave oscillation frequency is ϳ3 Hz, as in humans; however, GABAB receptor
involvement was never investigated. Ferrets also show
ϳ3-Hz paroxysmal oscillations that are also dependent on
Physiol Rev • VOL

GABAB receptors, but so far it has been described only in
thalamic slices. In rats, however, the spike-and-wave oscillations occur at a faster frequency (5–10 Hz) that is
inconsistent with the slow kinetics of GABAB-mediated
IPSPs (ϳ300 ms). Indeed, intracellular recordings in the
generalized absence epilepsy rat from Strasbourg (GAERS)
show that thalamic neurons are paced by GABAA IPSPs
(251), consistent with the exacerbation of seizures by
GABAA agonists in rats (160, 342). However, GABAB receptors must somehow participate in the maintenance of
the paroxysmal oscillation, as suggested by the protective
effects of GABAB antagonists (200).
These experiments show that a complex interplay of
GABAA and GABAB conductances is probably involved in
generating spike-and-wave discharges, but the exact
mechanisms are unclear. In the next sections, we review
models for thalamic ϳ3-Hz paroxysmal oscillations and
for thalamocortical oscillations with spike-and-wave field
potentials at either 3 or 5–10 Hz.

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 13. The 3-Hz spike-and-wave discharges obtained by altering cortical inhibition. A: spike-and-wave discharges
following diffuse application of penicillin to the cortex of cats. Top: stimulation of nucleus centralis medialis (NCM; 7
Hz) induced a recruiting response in the cortex. Bottom: after diffuse application of a diluted solution of penicillin to the
cortex (50 IU/hemisphere) in the same animal, 4-Hz stimulation of NCM elicited bilaterally synchronous spike-and-wave
activity. Similar spike-and-wave discharges also occurred spontaneously. [Modified from Gloor et al. (130).] B: computational model of the transformation of spindle oscillations into ϳ3 Hz spike-and-wave by reducing cortical inhibition.
A thalamocortical network of 400 neurons was simulated, and 5 cells of each type are shown from top to bottom. The
last traces show the field potentials generated by the array of pyramidal neurons. Left: 50% decrease of GABAA-mediated
inhibition in cortical cells. The oscillation begins like a spindle, but strong burst discharges appear after a few cycles,
leading to large-amplitude negative spikes followed by slow positive waves in the field potentials. Right: fully developed
spike-and-wave oscillations following suppression of GABAA-mediated inhibition in cortical cells. All cells had prolonged, in-phase discharges, separated by long periods of silence, at a frequency of ϳ2 Hz. GABAB currents were
maximally activated in TC and PY cells during the periods of silence. Field potentials displayed spike-and-wave
complexes. Thalamic inhibition was intact in A and B. [Modified from Destexhe (86).]

1430

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

3. Models of paroxysmal discharges in the thalamus
Models of spike-and-wave oscillations first addressed
the progressive transformation of spindle oscillations into
synchronized 3-Hz oscillations following blockade of
GABAA receptors in the thalamus (96, 105, 136, 349, 353).
An early model (105) replicated the transformation of
spindles into slow 3-Hz oscillations by slowing the decay
of GABAergic currents, but this model did not investigate
the presence of two types of GABAergic receptors. In
another model, disinhibition of interneurons projecting to
TC cells with GABAB-specific connections resulted in
stronger discharges when GABAA receptors are antagonized, as proposed by Soltesz and Crunelli (289). This
model included TC, RE, and interneurons (349) and reproduced the stronger discharges in TC cells following
application of bicuculline. Although it is possible that this
mechanism plays a role in thalamically generated epileptic discharges, it does not account for experiments showing the decisive influence of the RE nucleus in preparations devoid of interneurons (164, 165). Increased synchrony and stronger discharges occurred in another
model (353), but the synchronous state coexisted with a
desynchronized state of the network, which has never
Physiol Rev • VOL

been observed experimentally. Full agreement with experimental data was obtained only when the cooperative
activation proposed for GABAB receptors (106a) was included. Network models including this cooperative activation (96, 136) produced robust synchronized oscillations and traveling waves at the network level, similar to
those observed in thalamic slices (182). This property also
led to the transformation of spindles to ϳ3-Hz paroxysmal
oscillations following block of GABAA receptors.
These two modeling studies concluded that the transition from spindle to paroxysmal 3-Hz oscillations can be
achieved provided there was cooperativity in GABAB responses (96, 136). GABAB responses must depend nonlinearly on the presynaptic pattern of activity; they are elicited only under intense stimulation conditions, for example, after long presynaptic bursts of spikes. The nonlinear
activation properties of this response were modeled by an
intracellular second messenger system involving multiple
G protein bindings to activate the Kϩ channels associated
with GABAB receptors (106a). This mechanism can account for the different patterns of GABAB responses observed in the hippocampus (75, 109) and in the thalamus
(165, 183). The prediction that the GABAB nonlinearity is

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 14. Slow thalamic oscillation
after suppression of GABAA-mediated inhibition. A: intracellular recording of a
relay neuron in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus in ferret thalamic slices during spindle waves. Blocking GABAA receptors by bath application of bicuculline
(second trace) slowed the oscillation to
2– 4 Hz and markedly increased rebound
burst activity. Further application of the
GABAB receptor antagonist saclofen
abolished this slow oscillation (third
trace). Recovery after washout of antagonists shows that these effects are reversible (last trace). [Modified from von
Krosigk et al. (346).] B: computational
model of the 3-Hz thalamic oscillation in
thalamic networks. The graphs show
(from top to bottom) a representative example of the membrane potential of TC
and RE cells (VTC, VRE), the fraction of
TC cells (␳TC) active as a function of time
during slow oscillations, as well as during
spindle oscillations for comparison (bottom graph). In control conditions, the
network generated 6- to 7-Hz spindle oscillations (shown in Fig. 6B). After suppressing GABAA receptors, the circuit
showed a slow 2- to 3-Hz oscillation,
which was more synchronized than spindle oscillations (see ␳TC in bottom graphs).
[Modified from Wang et al. (353).]

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

4. Model of absence seizures in the
thalamocortical system
Evidence from a number of experimental studies
indicates that the paroxysmal thalamic 3-Hz oscillation
discussed above is a phenomenon distinct from spike-

5
Bicuculline was later shown to also block the apamin-sensitive
calcium-dependent current in RE cells (76). Because this current is
important for controlling burst generation in RE cells (17), bicuculline
therefore does not exert specific effects on GABAA receptors. Other
antagonists are used, such as picrotoxin, that also induce slow thalamic
oscillations, showing that this oscillation is generated through antagonist actions on GABAA receptors in the RE nucleus (266).

Physiol Rev • VOL

and-wave seizures. Injections of GABAA antagonists into
the thalamus with the cortex intact failed to generate
spike-and-wave seizures (130, 258, 302). In these in vivo
experiments, suppressing thalamic GABAA receptors led
to “slow spindles” around 4 Hz, quite different from spikeand-wave oscillations (Fig. 15A). On the other hand,
spike-and-wave discharges were obtained experimentally
by diffuse application of GABAA antagonists to the cortex
(130) (Fig. 13A). In these in vivo experiments, spindles
were transformed into spike-and-wave discharges by altering cortical inhibition without changes in the thalamus.
We review below models that explored possible mechanisms to explain these observations and to relate them to
the 3-Hz thalamic oscillation (86).
To investigate this problem, it is necessary to compare the field potentials generated by a thalamocortical
model in different conditions (86). Altering thalamic
GABAA-mediated inhibition in the model slowed the spindle oscillations from ϳ10 to ϳ4 Hz (Fig. 15B). Calculation
of the extracellular field potentials generated by the array
of cortical neurons (see methods in Ref. 86) showed that
both of these oscillation types displayed negative deflections (Fig. 15B, bottom traces), in agreement with experiments. Thus selectively altering thalamic inhibition generated field potential patterns similar to spindles at the
level of the cortex, but no spike-and-wave patterns. This
occurs because in both conditions, pyramidal neurons are
under strict control of cortical inhibition and fire moderate discharge patterns, generating negative deflections in
field potentials.
In contrast, when GABAA-mediated cortical inhibition was selectively altered in the model, prolonged discharges occurred that were strongly reflected in the field
potentials. Reduction of intracortical GABAA conductances to 50% of their normal values increased the occurrences of prolonged high-frequency discharges during
spindle oscillations (Fig. 13B, left panel). Further decrease in intracortical fast inhibition led to highly synchronized and prolonged discharges, which generated
spike-and-wave patterns in the simulated field potentials
(Fig. 13B, right panel). This agrees with experiments in
cats showing that spike-and-wave oscillations can be obtained from a diffuse application of the GABAA antagonist
penicillin to the cortex, with no change in the thalamus
(130). In the model, the spike-and-wave field potentials
consisted of one or several negative/positive sharp deflections, followed by a slowly developing positive wave (Fig.
13B, bottom traces). During the “spike,” all cells fired
prolonged high-frequency discharges in synchrony, while
the “wave” was coincident with neuronal silence in all cell
types. This portrait is typical of experimental recordings
of cortical and thalamic cells during spike-and-wave patterns (16, 48, 168, 229, 254, 273, 293, 294). Some TC cells
remained hyperpolarized during the entire oscillation
(second TC cell in Fig. 13B, right panel), as also observed

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

a property intrinsic to the kinetics of these receptors is
consistent with the nonlinearity found in single-axon
GABAB responses in thalamic (183) and neocortical slices
(327).
The action of the antiabsence drug clonazepam in rat
thalamic slices (164) can also be explained using the
nonlinear activation of GABAB responses (106a). Clonazepam, by reinforcing GABAA-mediated interactions in the
RE nucleus, diminishes the number of spikes produced by
RE cells and therefore will diminish the tendency of RE
cells to activate GABAB responses in TC cells. A similar
mechanism was explored in another modeling study
(325), which reported that agents augmenting the GABAAmediated inhibition in the RE nucleus act as desynchronizers by reducing the IPSP on TC cells, and thereby
reduce TC cell’s firing probability. This model also indicated that substances such as benzodiazepines may exert
their effects through an increase of inhibition in the RE
nucleus. Another model (215) suggested that antidromic
activation must be taken into account for reproducing in
detail the effect of clonazepam in thalamic slices.
The genesis of the slow thalamic oscillation is based
on a mechanism opposite to that of clonazepam. The
GABAA antagonist bicuculline suppresses inhibitory interactions between RE cells,5 allowing them to produce
large burst discharges. These bursts constitute the optimal signal to activate GABAB receptors in TC cells, which
are maintained hyperpolarized for ϳ300 ms, then produce
a rebound LTS at the offset of the GABAB IPSP that
reexcites RE cells, and restarts the cycle. A similar oscillatory mechanism was found by several modeling studies
(96, 105, 136, 353) that successfully reproduced the oscillation found in thalamic slices following suppression of
GABAA receptors. This slow thalamic oscillation is depicted in Figure 14B, which illustrates the augmented
synchrony of thalamic neurons compared with that during spindle oscillations (see bottom graphs; also compare
with Fig. 6B). In the next sections, we review biophysical
mechanisms that were proposed to link this slow paroxysmal oscillation in the thalamus with spike-and-wave
seizures.

1431

1432

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

experimentally (301; see Ref. 216 for a detailed computational model of this condition). The transformation between spindle oscillations and spike-and-wave patterns
was continuous (86), as observed in experiments (186,
187). Similar patterns arose when GABAA receptors were
suppressed in the entire network (data not shown).
A slow 2- to 4-Hz frequency oscillation in this model
could be elicited by a cortically induced activation of
GABAB receptors in the thalamus. Because of the increase of cortical excitability, the feedback from the cortex onto the thalamus was exceedingly strong, forcing RE
cells to fire large burst discharges, which activate fullblown GABAB-mediated responses in TC cells (86). As
shown above (see Fig. 11 in sect. IVA), moderate activation of corticothalamic synapses can trigger oscillations
in thalamic circuits (if correctly timed with respect to
their refractory period). However, when corticothalamic
synapses were strongly activated, they triggered proPhysiol Rev • VOL

longed high-frequency bursts of action potentials in RE
cells, which in turn activated GABAB currents in TC cells.
Large burst discharges were indeed observed in RE cells
during seizures in GAERS (283). Models therefore predict
that strong cortical inputs are able to switch the intact
thalamic circuits to a slow oscillatory mode at ϳ3 Hz.
This cortically induced switch of thalamic oscillatory
mode was also found experimentally in thalamic slices
(see sect. IVB5).
In another modeling study of cortical circuits during
the transformation of spindle to seizure activity (13),
frequency switch from 10 Hz (spindle) to 3 Hz (seizure)
occurred because of mechanisms intrinsic to the cortex
(13), rather than a switch in the cortical drive to the
thalamus as studied in the model described above (86).
This assumed that there are no interconnections between
interneurons (13). Under these conditions, rhythmic inputs from the thalamus can lead to prolonged discharges

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 15. Block of thalamic GABAA inhibition does not generate spike-and-wave. A: local injection of bicuculline in
the thalamus of a cat under barbiturate anesthesia. Top: before injection, three thalamic multiunit recordings (Th1-Th3)
from foci separated by 2 mm revealed bursts of action potentials corresponding to spindle oscillations. These oscillations
are also reflected in the EEG from the ipsilateral pericruciate cortex (Cx prec.). Bottom: injection of bicuculline between
electrodes 2 and 3 increased the number of action potentials per burst and reduced the oscillation frequency from 10 to
ϳ4 Hz. This reduced frequency was reflected in the EEG, but no spike-and-wave discharges were observed. [Modified
from Steriade and Contreras (302).] B: suppression of thalamic GABAA inhibition in a computational model of the
thalamocortical system. Left: spindle oscillations in the thalamocortical network in control conditions. The field
potentials, consisting of successive negative deflections at ϳ10 Hz, are shown at the bottom. Right: oscillations following
the suppression of GABAA-mediated inhibition in thalamic cells with cortical inhibition intact. The network generated
synchronized oscillations at ϳ4 Hz, with thalamic cells displaying prolonged discharges. The discharge pattern of PY
cells resembled spindles but at a lower frequency, as reflected in the field potentials (bottom). [Modified from Destexhe
(86).]

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

Physiol Rev • VOL

These simulations suggest that the different frequencies of the spike-and-wave oscillations in different experimental models may be a consequence of different balances between GABAergic conductances in TC cells. This
hypothesis was tested in models by varying these conductances (87). The same model showed a continuum of
oscillations, ranging from ϳ2 to 11 Hz, all of which display
spike-and-wave field potentials. In particular, a “fast”
(5–10 Hz) type of spike-and-wave oscillation could be
observed with intact thalamus but decreased cortical inhibition (87). The mechanism of this oscillation was similar to that depicted above, except that TC cells were
paced by GABAA conductances, as observed experimentally during the fast spike-and-wave oscillations in the
GAERS rat (251). The only difference was that this model
had stronger GABAA conductances and weaker GABAB
conductances in TC cells (see details in Refs. 87, 106b).
Finally, models have also been used to investigate
mechanisms for intracortical spike-and-wave oscillations.
There is a form of spike-and-wave discharge in isolated
cortex or athalamic preparations in cats (219, 248, 302).
This type of paroxysmal oscillation has a lower 1- to
2.5-Hz frequency and a morphology that is different from
that of the typical “thalamocortical” spike-and-wave oscillation (103, 248). Intracortical spike-and-wave discharges have not been observed in athalamic rats (341)
and have never been reported in neocortical slices. In the
model, if a subset of pyramidal cells had LTS activity, as
observed in some cortical areas (103, 79), then isolated
cortical networks could sustain a form of purely cortical
spike-and-wave discharges, displaying a sequence of
GABAB IPSP and rebound bursts, similar to the mechanism analyzed above. A small number of LTS pyramidal
cells were sufficient to generate paroxysmal oscillations
with spike-and-wave field potentials in the disinhibited
isolated cortex (103). The spike-and-wave oscillations in
this model, as in experiments, had a lower frequency
(1.8 –2.5 Hz) and a different shape from those in the
thalamocortical model. Similar findings were also reported recently in a model of cortex consisting of interconnected pyramidal neurons and interneurons (329).
This model included an Ih current in pyramidal neurons
and the elevated extracellular Kϩ concentration in the
epileptic focus, leading to particularly strong rebound
properties of Ih-containing pyramidal neurons, entraining
the network in slow hypersynchronized oscillations.
5. Control of thalamic oscillations
by corticothalamic feedback
The central mechanism proposed for the genesis of
thalamocortical spike and wave predicts that cortical inputs can force physiologically intact thalamic circuits to
oscillate at ϳ3 Hz (see above). To test this prediction in

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

in cortical cells and longer lasting inhibition when the
cortex was hyperexcitable, presumably leading to spikeand-wave EEG patterns (although the authors did not
confirm this with simulated field potentials). This study
also did not include the different GABAergic and glutamatergic receptor types, nor any explicit representation
of the intrinsic properties of thalamic neurons. Although
the thalamocortical loop was involved in the model, no
precise mechanisms were given on how the 3-Hz cortical
activity entrained the thalamus at this frequency.
In a thalamocortical model of 3-Hz spike-and-wave
seizures (86), the mechanisms for seizure generation depend on a thalamocortical loop where both cortex and
thalamus are necessary, but none of them generates the
3-Hz rhythmicity alone. The cycle starts with the genesis
of a rebound burst in TC cells, which triggers strong
discharges in cortical PY cells and interneurons; the cortical discharge also triggers large bursts in RE neurons so
that all cell types fire nearly at the same time, corresponding to “spike” component of the EEG. There is a slight
phase advance for TC cells, as observed experimentally in
rats (168, 273). Following these concerted discharges, all
cell types become silent for ϳ300 ms. Cortical cells are
silenced by the progressive activation of GABAB-mediated and intrinsic voltage-dependent Kϩ currents. In the
thalamus, the large bursts of RE cells elicit a mixture of
GABAA and GABAB conductances in TC cells, which keep
them hyperpolarized for ϳ300 ms before they rebound
and start the next cycle.
Besides reproducing the 3-Hz spike-and-wave oscillations, this mechanism has a number of interesting properties. First, the model was sensitive to intra-RE GABAA
inhibition (86). Reinforcing those connections augmented
the threshold for seizure, consistent with the presumed
role of the antiabsence drug clonazepam, which may reduce the tendency of the network to produce spike and
wave by specifically acting on GABAA receptors in the
thalamic RE nucleus (128, 160, 164). Second, diminishing
the AMPA conductance of cortical EPSPs on RE cells
significantly shifted the balance from spike-and-wave oscillations in favor of spindles (86). There is as yet no way
to selectively targets these synapses. Third, reducing the
IT conductance in RE cells significantly reduced spikeand-wave activity and increased spindle activity (86). This
is consistent with the experimental finding that the IT is
selectively increased in RE cells in a rat model of absence
epilepsy (333). This conductance affects the oscillation
synchrony (324). Fourth, the frequency of spike-and-wave
discharges could be effectively controlled by GABAB-mediated IPSPs on TC cells (86). This occurred because, in
this model, the duration of the “wave” was mainly determined by GABAB IPSPs in TC cells, longer IPSPs leading
to slower spike-and-waves by further delaying the rebound of TC cells. The frequency varied from 1 to 5 Hz for
decay values varying from 50 to 250% of the control value.

1433

1434

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

thalamic slices, one must reconstitute the thalamus-cortex-thalamus loop. This can be accomplished with a dynamic clamp that forms an artificial feedback loop be-

tween the TC neurons and the stimulation of corticothalamic fibers (Fig. 16A) (18, 31, 86). This technique was
first simulated using a model network of 100 PGN and 100

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 16. Cortical feedback can control the frequency and synchrony of thalamic oscillations. A: computational model
prediction that cortical feedback can force intact thalamic circuits to oscillate at 3 Hz. A scheme of connectivity and
receptor types in a circuit of thalamocortical (TC) and thalamic reticular (RE) neurons is shown. Corticothalamic
feedback was simulated through AMPA-mediated synaptic inputs (shown on the left of the connectivity diagram) and
could be directly triggered by the discharge of TC cells. [Modified from Destexhe (86).] B: a single stimulation of
corticothalamic feedback (arrow) entrained the circuit into a 10-Hz mode similar to spindle oscillations. C: after 3-Hz
stimulation with high intensity (arrows; 14 spikes/stimulus), RE cells were recruited into large bursts, which evoked
IPSPs onto TC cells dominated by GABAB-mediated inhibition. In this case, the circuit could be entrained into a different
oscillatory mode, with all cells firing in synchrony. D: implementation of this paradigm in thalamic slices. Stimulating
electrodes were placed in the optic radiation (OR), which contains corticothalamic axons connecting thalamocortical
cell in the LGN layers and GABAergic interneurons in the perigeniculate nucleus (PGN). E: weak (single shock)
stimulation at a latency of 20 ms after the detection of multiunit bursts activity (top trace). Bottom trace: smooth
integration of the multiunit signal. F: a 7-Hz control spindle is robustly slowed to 3-Hz oscillation by the feedback
stimulation (5 shocks, 100 Hz, 20-ms delay). [Modified from Bal et al. (18).]

Physiol Rev • VOL

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

Physiol Rev • VOL

C. Computational Roles
of Synchronized Oscillations
In this final section, we turn to experiments and
models suggesting possible physiological roles for the
slow oscillations.
1. Evidence for memory reprocessing
during slow-wave sleep
Many studies have shown that REM sleep deprivation
affects long-term memory (80, 118, 156). However, the
effects of stress and REM deprivation were confounded in
these studies (158, 282, 343). More recently, sleep deprivation studies have reported that slow-wave sleep may be
involved in some forms of memory consolidation. The
performance on visual discrimination tasks is significantly enhanced if the training period is followed by
sleep, but the enhancement correlates most closely with
slow-wave sleep (120, 124, 316, 317). Similar results were
reported for ocular dominance plasticity during the critical period in kittens (121). Animals allowed to sleep for
6 h after a period of monocular stimulation developed
twice the amount of brain change as those cats with the
same stimulation kept awake in the dark for 6 h, consistent with earlier observations (167). Moreover, the
amount of change was strongly correlated with the
amount of slow-wave sleep and not with the amount of
REM sleep. This is direct evidence that one function of
slow-wave sleep is to help consolidate the effects of waking experience on cortical plasticity, converting memory
into more permanent forms, as suggested previously (120,
235, 303). The different phases of sleep may have different
impacts on memory consolidation, with the early part of
slow-wave sleep and late part of REM sleep periods having more effect than other phases (reviewed in Ref. 316).
Another line of evidence implicates interactions between the hippocampus and the neocortex in consolidating declarative memories during sleep. Recordings from
freely moving rats during wake and sleep states corroborate the idea that the hippocampus and the neocortex
interact during sleep (46, 47, 239, 281, 318, 362). In these
experiments, neurons that had neighboring place fields
and fired together during exploration of a new environment became more highly correlated during subsequent
sleep episodes compared with activity during previous
sleep episodes. The correlated firing of neurons in the
hippocampus during sleep may be a “played back” version
of newly acquired experiences to the neocortex through
feedback projections (46, 54, 220, 221, 281). Thus the
neocortex during the wake state provides the hippocampal formation with a detailed description of the days
events; during sleep, the hippocampus may recapitulate
some version of these events to the neocortex, where
permanent memory representations are gradually formed

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

LGN cells interconnected via AMPA, GABAA, and GABAB
receptors. The spike activity of one TC cell was used to
trigger the stimulation of corticothalamic EPSPs across
the entire network. A burst of action potential in the
trigger TC cell started a high-frequency (100 Hz) burst of
AMPA-mediated corticothalamic EPSPs in RE and TC
neurons. The strength of the feedback stimulation was
adjusted by controlling the number of corticothalamic
EPSPs (number of shocks).
For mild feedback (1– 4 shocks), the pattern of TC
and RE discharge was typical of spindle oscillations (Fig.
16B). Individual TC cells showed subharmonic bursting
activity and were not tightly synchronized. The presence
of the feedback did not disrupt the spindle oscillations
and only slightly increased the synchrony of TC cells.
When the number of stimuli was increased to more than
five shocks, the pattern of bursting changed qualitatively
and the network switched to slow (2– 4 Hz) oscillations
(Fig. 16C). In this case the degree of synchrony was
higher than spindles because all cells fired within the
same phase of the oscillation. This activity is consistent
with the previous model, in which the entire system
switched to synchronized 3-Hz oscillations in the presence of an abnormally strong corticothalamic feedback
(86).
Recent experiments performed in ferret thalamic
slices (18, 31) have further verified the predictions of this
model (Fig. 16, D–F). In these experiments, the activity of
thalamic relay cells was used to trigger the electrical
stimulation of corticothalamic fibers (Fig. 16D). With this
feedback, the activity in the slice depended on the stimulus strength. For mild feedback, the slice generated normal spindle oscillations (Fig. 16E). However, for strong
stimulation of corticothalamic fibers, the activity
switched to slow synchronized oscillations at ϳ3 Hz (Fig.
16F). This behavior was dependent on GABAB receptors,
as shown by its sensitivity to GABAB antagonists (18).
These results suggest that strong corticothalamic feedback can force physiologically intact thalamic circuits to
oscillate synchronously at 3 Hz. The same results were
also obtained in another study (31).
Thus it seems that one of the key hypotheses for
generating 3-Hz spike-and-wave oscillations is valid at
least in the visual thalamus of ferrets. Excessively strong
corticothalamic activation can force the intact thalamus
to oscillate at 3 Hz. The model further indicates that this
3-Hz rhythm will lead to spike-and-wave field potentials,
but only if the cortex is hyperexcitable. The large-scale
synchrony of these oscillations is achieved using the same
mechanism as described in section IVA2. Thus seizures
and their highly synchronized EEG patterns can be explained by thalamocortical loops with a hyperexcitable
cortex.

1435

1436

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

over repeated episodes of synchronized slow-wave activity. This scenario is consistent with the finding that lesions limited to the hippocampus and surrounding regions produce memory impairment in monkeys and humans, but only recent memories are impaired while
remote memories are intact (7, 374). Together, these experiments suggest that the hippocampal formation is required for memory storage for only a limited time period
after learning. As time passes, its role in memory diminishes, and a more permanent memory gradually develops,
probably in neocortex, that is independent of the hippocampal formation (34, 131, 178, 221, 292, 374). This
gradual consolidation of information in the neocortex
may occur during slow-wave sleep.
2. The spatiotemporal structure of slow-wave sleep

Physiol Rev • VOL

3. The impact of slow waves on cortical neurons
Much is known about the cellular mechanisms that
generate spindle and the network mechanisms that control their synchrony. However, little has been done to
investigate the impact that these oscillations might have
on the cortical network. During spindles, TC neurons
generate synchronized high-frequency bursts of action
potentials, which are expected to have a strong impact on
the cortical recipient neurons. However, intracellular recordings of cortical neurons during spindles do not reveal
such a strong impact. Despite the potentially powerful
nature of synchronized thalamic burst inputs, pyramidal
neurons have a relatively low rate of discharge during
spindle oscillations (63, 117, 295), as shown in Figure 18A.
Intracellularly recorded pyramidal neurons in the suprasylvian gyrus of cats under barbiturate anesthesia showed
that spindle oscillations in the EEG are paralleled with
EPSP/IPSP sequences in cortical neurons (Fig. 18, Ai and
Aii). These sequences were indistinguishable from that
obtained from thalamic stimulation, suggesting that spindle-related IPSPs were triggered by thalamic inputs. To
further characterize the IPSP component, dual intracellular recordings were performed in which one cell was
recorded using a KCl-filled pipette. Cells recorded with
chloride pipettes fired bursts of four to seven action potentials at 100 Hz with spike inactivation, in phase with
spindle waves (Fig. 18Aiii). These experiments revealed

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

Although many experiments show that slow-wave
sleep may be important for “off-line” memory reprocessing, there are few that reveal the underlying mechanisms.
One of the difficulties is that slow-wave sleep is composed
of several types of EEG oscillations, such as spindle (7–14
Hz), delta (1– 4 Hz), and slower (0.3–1 Hz) oscillations.
There is also evidence that slow-wave sleep contains brief
periods during which faster (20 – 60 Hz) oscillations (beta
and gamma range) occur, which are characteristic of
wakefulness or REM sleep (see below).
During wakefulness, the EEG is dominated by lowamplitude fast oscillations (Fig. 17A, left panel). Several
studies (101, 111, 139, 298) have shown that these fast
oscillations are characterized by relatively low spatiotemporal coherence, as shown in the correlations which fluctuated in both space and time, only reaching high values
occasionally and only for neighboring sites (Fig. 17B, left
panel). Analyzing the correlations between extracellularly
recorded units and local EEG revealed that units fired
tonically, and wave-triggered averages showed that unit
firing was correlated with the depth-EEG negativity (Fig.
17C, left panel). Similar characteristics were found for the
fast oscillations during REM sleep (101).
In contrast to the fast oscillations of activated states,
the EEG oscillations of slow-wave sleep are remarkably
coherent across several millimeters in cortex (101) (Fig.
17A, middle panel). Consistent with this, correlations
during slow waves stay high across wide regions of the
cortex (Fig. 17B, middle panel). Remarkably, slow-wave
complexes are correlated with a concerted decreased/
increased firing in single units (Fig. 17C, middle panel).
This shows that these high-amplitude EEG waves reflect a
remarkably synchronized network dynamics consisting of
a generalized silence followed by a concerted firing of the
cells. Similar conclusions were drawn for delta waves in
various preparations (22, 48, 123), for spontaneous slow
oscillations under anesthesia (65, 331), as well as in cortical slices (267).

Perhaps the most interesting observation was that
slow-wave sleep also contains a myriad of brief episodes
of low-amplitude fast oscillations that are nested within
slow-wave complexes (Fig. 17A, right panel). These
“wakelike” episodes were observed during natural sleep
in cats (101, 300) as well as in anesthetized animals (147,
363). Focusing specifically on these brief episodes
showed that their spatial and temporal coherence are
similar to the fast oscillations during wakefulness (Fig.
17B, right panel). This similarity applied to the relationship between the fast oscillations and unit discharges,
which showed that the depth-negative EEG components
are correlated with an increased probability of unit firing
(Fig. 17C, right panels). Therefore, these brief wakelike
episodes are electrophysiologically indistinguishable
from the “sustained” fast oscillations of wake and REM
sleep.
The observation that highly coherent slow-wave patterns alternate with brief episodes of low-coherence fast
oscillations can be interpreted in several ways. Slow
waves and fast oscillations might represent different
states of responsiveness of cortical neurons and different
receptive field properties (70, 112, 147, 363). We favor
another interpretation (101, 106b), in which slow-wave
sleep is viewed as a cyclic, iterating process leading to
memory reprocessing (see below).

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

1437

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 17. Spatial and temporal coherence of wake and sleep oscillations. A: bipolar local field potential (LFP)
recordings at 4 equidistant sites (1 mm interelectrode distance) in suprasylvian cortex of cats during natural wake (left)
and slow-wave sleep states (middle; note different time scale). Awake periods consisted in low-amplitude fast (20 – 60
Hz) activity while slow-wave sleep was dominated by waves of slower frequency (0.5– 4 Hz) and larger amplitude. Right
panel shows a period of slow-wave sleep with higher magnification, in which a brief episode of fast oscillations was
apparent (dotted line). B: correlations between different sites, calculated in moving time windows. Correlations were
fluctuating between high and low values between neighboring sites during fast oscillations (left), but rarely attained high
values for distant sites (1– 4; “Sh.” indicates the control correlation obtained between electrode 1 and the same signal
taken 20 s later). In contrast, correlations always stayed high during slow-wave sleep (middle). Episodes of fast
oscillations during slow-wave sleep (right) revealed similar correlation patterns as during the wake state. C: wavetriggered averages between extracellularly recorded units and LFP activity. During the wake state, the negativity of fast
oscillations was correlated with an increase of firing (left; “control” indicates randomly shuffled spikes). The negativity
of slow-wave complexes was correlated with an increased firing preceded by a silence in the units (middle; note different
time scale). During the brief episodes of fast oscillations of slow-wave sleep (right), the correspondence between units
and LFP was similar as in wakefulness. [Modified from Destexhe et al. (101).]

Physiol Rev • VOL

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

1438

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

FIG. 18. Evidence that spindle oscillations evoke calcium entry in pyramidal neurons. A: in vivo intracellular
recordings in suprasylvian cortical neurons during spindle oscillations under barbiturate anesthesia. i: Simultaneous
recording of intracellular and extracellular activity. ii: Each cycle of the spindle oscillation corresponds to EPSP/IPSP
sequences in the recorded pyramidal neuron. iii: Dual intracellular recording in which one of the neurons (middle trace)
was recorded with chloride-filled pipettes. In this case, the EPSP/IPSP sequence transformed into a powerful burst of
action potentials. B: computational models of thalamic inputs in pyramidal neurons. i: Morphology used in the
simulations. A layer V pyramidal neuron recorded intracellularly in A was filled and its morphology was integrated into
simulations. Simulations of thalamic inputs in layers I, IV, and VI (gray areas) were directly compared with the
experimental recordings of thalamic inputs in that cell. ii: Simulated EPSP/IPSP sequences and bursts after inversion of
the chloride reversal potential. The model could match experiments only if both excitatory and inhibitory conductances
were strong. iii: Calcium transients in the dendrites of the model following thalamic inputs. The membrane potential at
the soma (top trace) consisted in an EPSP/IPSP sequence. However, representing the profile of calcium concentration
(bottom trace) along a path from soma (left) to distal apical dendrite (*) shows large calcium transients in response to
strong dendritic depolarization. [Modified from Contreras et al. (63).]

that a strong feedforward inhibition is recruited in the
cortex when the thalamus fires bursts in synchrony (63).
Computational models were used to estimate the
exact amount and distribution of synaptic conductances
and concluded that during synchronized thalamic input,
there is a mixture of strong excitatory and inhibitory
conductances (63). This conclusion was reached based on
three-dimensional reconstructions and simulations of
Physiol Rev • VOL

some of the neurons recorded experimentally (Fig. 18Bi),
and constraining the model directly using the recordings
obtained in those neurons. Simulating the control and
IPSP-reversed responses (Fig. 18Bii) could only be obtained if there was an asymmetry of conductance distribution in the cell: the proximal region had to be dominated by GABAergic conductances, while the dendrites
had to be dominated by strong glutamatergic conduc-

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

4. Cellular mechanisms for memory reprocessing
during slow-wave sleep
Various calcium-dependent mechanisms are involved
in synaptic plasticity (reviewed in Ref. 127). Thus calcium
entry during sleep may serve to activate cortical plasticity
mechanisms (reviewed in Ref. 106b). In particular, calmodulin kinase II (CaMKII), an enzyme that is abundant
at synapses and is implicated in synaptic plasticity of
excitatory synapses in the cortex and elsewhere (287,
365), is not only sensitive to Ca2ϩ but also to the frequency of Ca2ϩ spikes (78). It is possible that sleep spindles provide a signal to optimally activate CaMKII in the
dendrites of cortical pyramidal neurons.
Another possible consequence of massive Ca2ϩ entry
in pyramidal neurons is calcium-dependent gene expression, which is also frequency sensitive (141, 195) in the
delta range of frequencies (1– 4 Hz). Calcium that enters
dendrites during spindles may accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum, which forms a continuous compartment within the neuron, and is also continuous with the
nucleus. Calcium-stimulated calcium release from the endoplasmic reticulum during delta waves may then deliver
the calcium signal to the nucleus (26).
A third possibility is that the repeated Ca2ϩ entry
activates a molecular “gate,” opening the door to gene
expression (106b). This possibility is based on the observation that repeated high-frequency stimuli, but not isolated stimuli, activate protein kinase A (PKA), an enzyme
Physiol Rev • VOL

implicated in long-lasting synaptic changes and long-term
memory (1). The proposed mechanism is that PKA acts
like a gate by inhibiting phosphoprotein phosphatases,
which themselves exert a tonic inhibition over biochemical cascades leading to gene expression (1, 29, 30) (for a
model of these biochemical cascades, see Ref. 27). The
evidence for this hypothetical mechanism is based on
observations that activation of PKA alone does not induce
synaptic changes, but blocking PKA suppresses long-term
synaptic changes in the hippocampus (122). All the necessary enzymes for this mechanism are located at or near
the active zone of the synapse (51, 108, 180, 233).
A cellular mechanism for memory reprocessing was
proposed (106b), based on complementary roles in network reorganization for two types of sleep oscillation,
spindles, and slow waves. At sleep onset, the thalamus
enters a burst mode and generates synchronized spindle
oscillations. During these oscillations, the high-frequency
bursts of thalamic relay cells occur synchronously in the
thalamus and therefore provide unusually strong excitatory/inhibitory inputs in cortical pyramidal neurons. The
repetition of these inputs at ϳ10 Hz is particularly efficient to trigger periodic calcium entry in cortical dendrites and activate intracellular mechanisms, such as
CaMKII or molecular gates. This process could serve to
open the door between synaptic activation and gene expression or mobilize particular molecular machinery
needed for synaptic plasticity so that pyramidal neurons
are ready to produce permanent changes in response to
subsequent synaptic events that need to be consolidated.
As sleep deepens, slow waves such as delta oscillations progressively dominate the EEG. A slow-wave complex is a remarkably synchronized network event, in
which a concerted period of silence is seen across the
network, followed by a rebound firing in most of the cells.
Some synapses could be “tagged” by short-term potentiation during the brief episodes of fast oscillations. During
the subsequent slow-wave(s), these tagged synapses
would then be selected by the synchronized pattern of
firing, through a calcium-mediated signal evoked in pyramidal cells. This calcium signal could be routed to the
nucleus (assuming the gate has been opened by spindles)
or to local protein synthesis in dendrites, leading to longterm modifications or even morphological changes. A
brief episode of fast oscillations that follows next would
then potentiate or tag another subset of synapses; these
tagged synapses would be selected by the next slow
waves for permanent changes, and the cycle repeats itself
several hundred times during the slow-wave sleep episode.
This “recall-store” hypothesis (106b) thus proposes
that slow-wave sleep iterates a process of memory reprocessing; the brief periods of fast oscillations represent a
recall of information acquired previously during wakefulness, which are subsequently stored by highly synchro-

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

tances. This distribution is in agreement with morphological data indicating that excitation and inhibition are not
evenly distributed in pyramidal neurons; the dendrites are
dominated by excitatory synapses while the soma essentially receives inhibitory synapses (77). This imbalance
necessarily implies that during strong afferent activity,
the dendrites must experience strong depolarization, in
parallel with a strong inhibition around the soma. This
conclusion is in agreement with direct measurements of
conductances during visual inputs in cortical neurons that
also revealed large GABAergic conductances (35).
Taken together, morphological data, in vivo intracellular recordings, and computational models suggest that
during spindling there is a strong increase of both excitatory and inhibitory conductances in pyramidal neurons.
This conductance increase induces a massive depolarization in the dendrites, combined with a strong proximal
inhibition preventing the cell from firing excessively.
Models (63) further indicate that this type of conductance
distribution is ideal to evoke a massive calcium entry in
dendrites through voltage-dependent Ca2ϩ channels, and
at the same time keep the neuron at low levels of firing
(Fig. 18Biii). This is consistent with in vitro studies showing that dendritic depolarization is accompanied by Ca2ϩ
entry (370).

1439

1440

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

nized events that appear as slow waves in the EEG.
Slow-wave sleep would thus begin by spindle oscillations
that open molecular gates to plasticity, then proceed by
iteratively “recalling” and “storing” information primed in
neural assemblies. Although speculative, this scenario is
consistent with what is currently known about the biophysical mechanisms of sleep oscillations (see details in
Ref. 106b). It is also consistent with the growing evidence
that sleep serves to consolidate memories, as well as with
models that require a “sleep” phase for the long-term
learning of generative representations (155). The key prediction is that slow-wave sleep is a specific state in which
information is consolidated by activating Ca2ϩ-mediated
intracellular cascades in pyramidal neurons.
V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

A. A Framework for Thalamic and
Thalamocortical Oscillations
Models provide a unifying framework to account for
apparently inconsistent experimental observations. Different experiments point to different ways to generate
spindle oscillations in the thalamus,. The original TCinterneuron model proposed by Andersen and Eccles (9)
identified two basic mechanisms for generating thalamic
oscillations: inhibition and the rebound burst. These two
mechanisms were essentially correct, except that they
proposed that the interneurons provided the inhibition,
but TC cells and interneurons are not reciprocally interconnected. Later, a TC-RE variant of this model, based on
the same mechanisms, was proposed by Scheibel and
Scheibel (269 –271), in which the inhibitory neurons in the
RE nucleus provided the reciprocal loop with TC cells.
The TC-RE loop also generates spindles in thalamic (170,
351, 346) and thalamocortical (322) slices. An alternative
mechanism was suggested in an in vivo study (308), which
reported that the isolated RE nucleus can generate oscillations without the need for interactions with TC cells.
This RE pacemaker hypothesis has not yet been confirmed by in vitro experiments, but given the difficulty of
preserving the connectivity of the RE in a slice preparation, this hypothesis is still a viable one (297).
Computational models proposed different scenarios
to account for these experiments. The RE pacemaker
hypothesis found support from computational models
which showed that the known intrinsic properties and
synaptic connectivity between RE cells can plausibly generate synchronized oscillations. Interconnected RE cells
Physiol Rev • VOL

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

We present here a synopsis of the main concepts in
this review, the questions that are still open, the predictions that would allow them to be tested, and prospects
for future studies.

with slow (GABAB) synapses can generate slow synchronized oscillations at a frequency of ϳ3 Hz (135, 354, 355).
Alternatively, RE cells with extended connectivity
through fast (GABAA) synapses can generate synchronized oscillations around 10 Hz (23, 90, 97, 98). Models
also reported that RE oscillations can show waxing-andwaning patterns, similar to experiments, which are generated by traveling waves of activity within the RE nucleus (23, 97).
The TC-RE hypothesis also found support from modeling studies, based on the intrinsic properties of TC and
RE cells, and the excitatory (AMPA) and inhibitory
(GABAA and GABAB) connectivity between the two types
of cells (96, 105, 136, 353). The subharmonic bursting of
TC cells during spindles was due to interactions between
IPSPs and the IT and Ih currents (352, 353), as found
earlier in cortical models (185). The typical waxing-andwaning patterns of spindle waves were due to Ca2ϩ-mediated upregulation of Ih (96, 105). The TC-RE pacemaker
could also be reconstructed by hybrid recording methods
in which real cells are connected to model cells (193).
Different models support both RE pacemaker and
TC-RE hypotheses, but an explanation was still needed
for why the RE nucleus does not oscillate in vitro. One
modeling study proposed that this apparent contradiction
can be relaxed based on the action of neuromodulators
(98). This model reproduced the quiescent state of the RE
nucleus in the absence of neuromodulators, similar to in
vitro recordings, as well as ϳ10 Hz waxing-and-waning
oscillations in the presence of weak neuromodulatory
drive, which may represent a situation closer to in vivo
recordings. When both TC-RE and RE pacemakers were
assembled in the same model, the results were consistent
with the initiation and propagation of spindle waves observed in thalamic slices (96).
At the level of the thalamocortical system, experiments demonstrated the large-scale coherence of spindle
waves in vivo (60, 61), but the same oscillations typically
show traveling wave patterns in thalamic slices (182).
Models showed that these two states can be obtained in
the same circuits (100). The model suggests that these
differences are primarily due to the presence of thalamocortical loops, which act through the RE nucleus
(thalamo-cortico-reticular loops) and which provide a
more global synchronization compared with what can be
achieved by intrathalamic loops alone (Fig. 12). Thalamocortical loops are highly efficient at synchronizing large
areas because the diverging cascade of axonal projection
systems reaches a wide area of the cortex on a single
cycle (cortex-to-RE, RE-to-TC, TC-to-cortex). In addition,
spindles may be initiated at roughly the same time at
different sites because of similar refractory periods in TC
cells; as a consequence, oscillations may spread over
large regions of the cortical mantle within a few cycles.
Thalamic slices deprived of this powerful synchronizing

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

B. Successful, Unsuccessful, and
Untested Predictions
Formulating predictions is probably one of the most
important contributions that models can make. They can
directly test the relevance of the model, lead to new
directions for further experimentation, and perhaps collectively provide new insights. We enumerate below key
predictions that were formulated by the models reviewed
above; some of these predictions have been already tested
experimentally.
1. Successful predictions
1) One of the main predictions of the modeling studies was that the waxing and waning of TC cell oscillations
is due to Ca2ϩ-mediated upregulation of Ih (85, 95, 96).
This mechanism was inspired from heart cells (144) and
was later demonstrated experimentally in thalamic neuPhysiol Rev • VOL

rons (19, 212). However, the direct binding of Ca2ϩ postulated initially (85, 95) was shown to be incorrect (44).
Ca2ϩ seems to act through an intermediate messenger,
cAMP (213), as also predicted by a more elaborate version
of the model (96). The model predicted that the upregulation of Ih occurs through Ca2ϩ (or cAMP) binding to the
open state of the channel, which was also found to be the
best possible explanation to the data (213). Recent data,
however, indicate that cyclic nucleotide-gated channels
are regulated by cAMP through the release of an inhibitory mechanism internal to the protein complex (347). It
is possible that similar mechanisms also apply to Ih,
which is a possible direction for future investigation.
2) A second successful prediction was that the “waning” of spindle waves is due to upregulation of Ih (95). In
particular, the unbinding of calcium (or calcium-bound
messenger) from Ih channels during the silent period
results in a slow recovery of these channels, which induces a progressive hyperpolarization of the membrane in
TC cells.6 This progressive hyperpolarization and the critical role of Ih in spindle termination were both demonstrated in ferret thalamic slices (19).
3) The model predicted that natural sleep and barbiturate anesthesia should correspond to different levels of
resting membrane potential in cortical pyramidal cells
(102). The model predicts that intracellular recordings
performed in neocortical pyramidal cells during natural
sleep should have a relatively depolarized resting level,
close to Ϫ60 mV, compared with the hyperpolarized resting level of Ϫ70 to Ϫ80 mV typical of barbiturate anesthesia. Recent results show that neocortical neurons in
naturally sleeping animals are maintained at approximately Ϫ65 mV, except during slow (0.5– 4 Hz) wave
complexes, when they hyperpolarize (314).
4) A fourth successful prediction of the model was
that the characteristic nonlinearity of GABAB responses is
a consequence of mechanisms intrinsic to single terminals containing these receptors (106a). Single-synapse
GABAB responses should not be activated by isolated
presynaptic spikes, but by high-frequency bursts of a large
number of presynaptic spikes. This property was essential
to explain the hypersynchronous 3-Hz oscillations in thalamic slices (96, 136) and is a central component in the
mechanism proposed for absence seizures (86). Dual intracellular recordings of single-axon GABAB responses
demonstrated this property in both thalamic (183) and
neocortical slices (327). Interestingly, the number of presynaptic spikes needed to start activating GABAB IPSPs
was lower in neocortex (Ͼ3 spikes) compared with thalamus (Ͼ10 spikes), presumably because the probability

6
This may also be described as an afterdepolarization (ADP)
following the spindle wave, which is actually the terminology used in the
in vitro experiments (19).

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

mechanism display systematic traveling wave propagation through the topographic structure of intrathalamic
connections (Fig. 12A).
This strong impact of corticothalamic inputs on thalamic circuits also accounted for pathological phenomena
such as absence seizures. The recruitment of the thalamus through the RE nucleus results in a dominant inhibition, which normally activates only GABAA receptors
because the discharge of RE cells is controlled by intra-RE inhibitory interactions. However, if the cortex generates too strong descending feedback, the RE cells are
forced into large burst discharges and activate GABABmediated inhibition, in addition to GABAA responses, in
TC cells. Consequently, this slower inhibition imposes a
slower oscillation frequency, and the thalamus will therefore tend to oscillate at 3 Hz with a strong corticothalamic
feedback. These predictions of the model (86) were corroborated in thalamic slices (18, 31). Thalamocortical
loops combined with a hyperexcitable cortex can generate hypersynchronous 3-Hz oscillations, which generate
spike and waves in the simulated field potentials (86).
This model accounts for a large body of experimental data
on absence seizures (see sect. IVB).
Consistent with intracellular recordings, models predict that the thalamus has a strong impact on the cortex
during spindles, perhaps leading to massive calcium entry
in these cells and activating calcium-dependent plasticity
mechanisms. This leads to the hypothesis that slow-wave
sleep processing occurs in two stages (106b): 1) spindle
oscillations would activate molecular gates, enabling further plasticity to be initiated in the activated neurons; and
2) the iteration between short “wakelike” episodes and
highly synchronized slow waves would perform “recallstore” operations, in which information acquired previously is consolidated through permanent synaptic changes.

1441

1442

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

2. Unsuccessful or unclear predictions
1) Several modeling studies have predicted that networks of RE cells reciprocally connected through fast
inhibitory synapses should oscillate at ϳ10 Hz (23, 90, 97).
RE cells are indeed sensitive to GABAA agonists (17, 164,
227, 291), and intracellularly recorded RE neurons display
fast GABAergic IPSPs (21, 97, 265, 266, 280, 336, 372).
There is evidence that some RE cells are connected
through dendro-dendritic synapses (83, 252, 368), and
axon collaterals also interconnect RE cells (174, 252, 368).
These data support an oscillatory mechanism implicating
mutual GABAA interactions in the RE nucleus. However,
several lines of evidence suggest more complex mechanisms. First, there are circumstances when GABAergic
Physiol Rev • VOL

interactions in the RE nucleus may act as “desynchronizers” (166) and protect against epileptic discharges (266).
Models suggest that this protective role depends on the
membrane potential (106a); intra-RE connections may
serve as a synchronizer at depolarized levels, but protect
against synchronization at more hyperpolarized levels
(see Fig. 2 in Ref. 96 for a simulation of this effect in
thalamic networks). Second, there is still a controversy
about the type and proportion of GABAA synapses in the
RE nucleus that mediate synaptic interactions between
these cells. A recent study reported few dendro-dendritic
synapses or axon collaterals, but found gap junctions
between RE neurons in mice (189), which might also
support oscillations between RE cells. Third, whether
GABAA-mediated interactions between RE cells are sufficiently powerful to entrain synchronized oscillations is
still unclear. A dynamic-clamp study showed that GABAAmediated rebound bursts occur with a significant delay,
questioning the relevance of inhibitory rebound mechanisms to RE oscillations at a frequency above 3 Hz (338).
However, other studies have shown that GABAA IPSPs in
RE cells, although of small apparent amplitude at the
soma, can have powerful effects such as completely
shunting the burst discharges of these cells (265). It has
been proposed that the dendritic localization of the IT in
RE cells may explain these observations (106c); dendritic
IT gives RE cells a high sensitivity to IPSPs, and rebound
bursts could be initiated in dendrites with small apparent
GABAergic conductances measured at the soma. In this
case, RE oscillations could arise from T-type and GABAA
currents interacting locally in dendrites with little or no
involvement of the soma. These possibilities constitute
interesting directions to explore with future models.
2) The oscillatory mechanism proposed for RE oscillations based on depolarizing GABAA interactions (23)
has not yet been confirmed. First, the evidence for depolarizing GABAA interactions comes from only a single
study (337). Hyperpolarizing fast IPSPs were observed in
intracellularly recorded RE cells in vivo (see Fig. 3 in Ref.
97), as well as in a number of in vitro studies of RE cells
(21, 97, 265, 266, 280, 336, 372). It is possible that species
differences may explain these conflicting observations.
Second, this model predicted that slow oscillations (ϳ2.5
Hz) should occur when RE neurons have hyperpolarized
resting levels (around Ϫ80 mV). However, such oscillations have never been observed in slices where the resting
levels of RE cells are typically around Ϫ80 mV. This
prediction awaits experimental confirmation.
3) Models predict a significant contribution of
GABAB-mediated Kϩ currents to the wave component of
spike-and-wave field potentials during seizures (86). Experiments (299, 313) have shown that the wave is not
GABAA mediated and is significantly affected by cesium, a
Kϩ channel blocker. The authors suggested that the wave
is a mixture of Ca2ϩ-dependent Kϩ currents and disfacili-

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

of release is low in thalamic inhibitory synapses. The
biophysical mechanism postulated by the model was that
four G proteins must bind to activate the Kϩ channels
associated with GABAB receptors (106a), consistent with
the tetrameric structure and activation properties of Kϩ
channels (150). The predicted multiplicity of G protein
binding sites could be tested experimentally by application of activated G proteins on membrane patches (see
Ref. 339), or by voltage-clamp experiments. Application of
G proteins on membrane patches was performed for muscarinic Kϩ channels, and a nonlinear response was observed with a Hill coefficient Ͼ3 (169); thus, at least in
this system, several G protein bindings are needed to
activate the Kϩ channels. Other kinetic studies have also
suggested that G proteins act on ion channels at multiple
binding sites (see Ref. 366 for the muscarinic current and
Refs. 32, 132 for Ca2ϩ currents in sympathetic neurons).
5) The models predicted that strong corticothalamic
feedback should force physiologically intact thalamic circuits to oscillate at ϳ3 Hz (86). In particular, this mechanism explicitly predicted that stimulation of corticothalamic fibers in vitro should force the intact slice to oscillate in a slower, more synchronized mode. This prediction
was successfully tested in slices (18, 31). Moderate stimulation of corticothalamic fibers did not affect the spontaneous rhythms besides entrainment, but strong stimuli
transformed spindle waves into hypersynchronous rhythms
at ϳ3 Hz (Fig. 16).
6) It was found recently that the antiepileptic drug
vigabatrin strongly affects spike-and-wave discharges in
rats (36). This drug increases GABA concentrations by
inhibiting GABA transaminase, one of the major enzymes
implicated in GABA degradation. In particular, this study
(36) demonstrated that vigabatrin decreases the frequency of spike-and-wave discharges (from 7.5 to 5.6 Hz),
as well as prolongs the duration of seizures (from 1.04 to
1.52 s). This effect occurs presumably through boosting of
both GABAA and GABAB responses and is in agreement
with predictions of the model (see Fig. 3 in Ref. 87).

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

3. Yet untested predictions
Several of the predictions made by the models have
not yet been tested experimentally (or are too difficult to
be tested with current techniques).
1) The discrepancy between in vivo and in vitro
experiments on RE oscillations could be reconciled by
models postulating that RE oscillations critically depend
on the resting membrane potential and should be sensitive to neuromodulators (98). In particular, application of
neuromodulators such as NE or 5-HT, at low concentration, should depolarize RE cells and restore the ability of
the RE nucleus to oscillate in vitro. Alternatively, the
infusion of noradrenergic and serotonergic antagonists in
vivo should alter the oscillatory capabilities of the isolated RE nucleus.
2) A second central prediction of the models is that
the inhibitory-dominant nature of the cortical feedback
on TC cells is critical in explaining large-scale synchrony
(100).7 This mechanism predicts that diminishing the efficiency of IPSPs evoked by RE cells onto TC cells should
not only change the genesis of the oscillations, but should
also impair the large-scale synchrony of spindle or spike-

7
Inhibitory dominance was not by itself a prediction, given the
large body of experimental evidence showing that cortical stimulation
primarily evoke IPSPs in TC cells (4, 45, 66, 82, 196, 263, 315, 330, 359).

Physiol Rev • VOL

and-wave oscillations. On the other hand, antagonizing
excitatory synapses on TC cells should not alter the largescale synchrony of these oscillations. This mechanism
could be tested by locally applying synaptic antagonists in
thalamocortical slices.
3) The models predict that horizontal propagation in
neocortical slices should be highly sensitive to the excitability of pyramidal neurons and that such horizontal
discharges tighten the synchrony of oscillations (102).
Local stimulation of the white matter in neocortical slices
produces limited horizontal propagation (5, 53, 64), but
the application of GABAA antagonists generates epileptic
discharges that propagate horizontally (5, 53, 64). The
model predicts that, in addition to GABAA antagonists,
propagation should also be facilitated by neuromodulators such as ACh. Discharges evoked in the “modulated”
slice should easily propagate at a speed of ϳ100 –200
mm/s, depending on the level of excitability (see details in
Ref. 102) and therefore should depend on the concentration of neuromodulator. This value is consistent with
current estimates of propagation velocity (42, 140). Such
rapidly propagating cortical discharges should also be
detectable by high-resolution optical recording methods
in awake or naturally sleeping animals.
4) A fourth prediction of the model is that evoked
propagation of spindle waves should not occur during
natural sleep (102). Low-intensity electrical stimulation of
the cortex can induce propagating oscillatory waves during barbiturate anesthesia, and these propagating oscillations persist after cortical cuts (61), suggesting that horizontal intracortical connections were not responsible.
However, intracortical connections should have an important role in supporting the simultaneous bursting of natural sleep spindles. This directly implies that it should not
be possible to evoke propagating oscillations by cortical
stimulation during natural sleep. A corollary to this prediction is that cortical cuts should significantly affect the
spatiotemporal patterns and synchrony of natural sleep
spindle oscillations. This is supported by the observation
of diminished interhemispheric synchrony of spindles following callosal transection (41).
5) The model predicts mechanisms for spike-andwave oscillations, at either 3 or 5–10 Hz, and which in
both cases involve inhibitory-rebound sequences in TC
cells (86, 87). This predicts that blocking the IT in TC cells
should suppress seizures.8 This is consistent with a presumed effect of the antiabsence drug ethosuximide on
reducing the effectiveness of the IT in thalamic neurons
(67) (for a model, see Ref. 214). This is also consistent
with recent genetic studies showing that mice lacking the
gene for the T-channel subunits present in TC cells (while

8
This is converse to the claims that the low-threshold spike in TC
cells is not involved in generating seizures in GAERS rats (251).

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

tation (299). However, these experiments show that the
wave is mediated in large part by Kϩ currents, consistent
with the mixture of voltage-dependent and GABAB-mediated Kϩ currents predicted by the model. Further experiments should be performed in the presence of more
specific antagonists (TEA, apamin, GABAB antagonists)
to evaluate the respective contribution of different Kϩ
currents to the wave.
4) Models have predicted that the fast (5–10 Hz) type
of spike-and-wave oscillation, as observed experimentally
in rats, is based on a thalamocortical loop mechanism
involving rebound bursts in TC cells (87). During spikeand-wave seizures in GAERS rats, TC cells display moderate firing and rarely display full-blown bursts (251).
However, the bursts displayed by the model were weak
and often consisted of single spikes (87). Such “weak”
rebound bursts may therefore be difficult to identify,
which may explain this experimental observation. Other
experiments in rats reported burst firing of TC cells during seizures (224, 273, 293) and that seizures seem to start
in a focus located in somatosensory cortex (231), suggesting that not all of the thalamus participates in seizures and
that full-blown bursts are seen only in some nuclei. Other
experiments showed that mice lacking the genes for the
T-channel subunits specific to TC cells do not display
seizures (181), which clearly demonstrates that thalamic
IT are involved in this type of seizure activity.

1443

1444

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

Physiol Rev • VOL

mented through the complex interactions between dendritic calcium currents and the activity of corticothalamic
synapses (88). High levels of background activity (of cortical origin) can prevent burst generation in TC and RE
cells through local dendritic interactions between glutamatergic and calcium conductances in dendrites (88, 99,
106c). This mechanism is fast, in contrast to other mechanisms implicating metabotropic receptors (see Ref. 222).
This mechanism directly predicts that high levels of cortical activity should switch the thalamus from burst mode
to tonic mode, therefore implementing a fast switch to a
more responsive state. This prediction could be tested in
slices by sustained random stimulation of corticothalamic
fibers, paired with stimulation of afferent activity.9 The
control of the responsiveness of thalamic neurons by
cortical activity is a highly important problem that can be
investigated by combining experiments and models.
12) Finally, the model predicts that synchronized
thalamic inputs should be associated with a strong increase of both excitatory and inhibitory conductances in
pyramidal neurons (63). This conductance increase
should induce a massive calcium entry localized in the
dendrites. This prediction should be testable using twophoton imaging studies of pyramidal neurons (320). The
model predicts a strong calcium signal in the dendrites,
but not in the soma, following strong afferent inputs, such
as during thalamic stimulation, spindle oscillations, or
slow-wave complexes.
C. Concluding Remarks
Two of the intuitions of Bremer (38 – 40) still form the
basis of our present understanding of the mechanisms of
brain rhythmicity. First, his proposition that oscillations
depend on the “excitability cycle” of cortical neurons, or
on neuronal autorhythmicity, constitute the first explicit
recognition for the importance of intrinsic neuronal properties (39). Studies in invertebrates, in vitro physiology of
central neurons, and molecular genetic approaches, have
contributed to our detailed understanding of these intrinsic properties based on ion channel conductances. Second, Bremer proposed that the EEG results from the
synchronized oscillatory activity of large assemblies of
oscillating cortical neurons, rather than arising from circulating action potentials. This concept of synchrony is
now well established, and the mechanisms leading to the
synchrony of large assemblies of neurons are still being
investigated.
Recent studies have revealed the intricate complexity of ion channel types and subunits, their uneven distribution in soma and dendrites, their expression at various
9
This is possible in slices from the visual thalamus, in which the
corticothalamic and retinal fibers are both accessible (18, 334).

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

not affecting RE cells) display a specific resistance to the
generation of spike-and-wave seizures (181).
6) The genesis of spike-and-wave discharges in the
model depends on an abnormally strong corticothalamic
feedback. This therefore predicts that during seizures,
there should be an increased output of cortical layer 6
neurons projecting to the thalamus. This increased output
could result from either an increase in the discharge of
individual neurons or an increase in the synchrony of the
population of neurons in layer 6 that project to the thalamus. This prediction could be tested in vivo or with
appropriate stimulation protocols in cortical or thalamocortical slices.
7) In the model for the fast (5–10 Hz) type of spikeand-wave oscillation in rodents, the frequency is higher
than in cats because of a different balance between GABAA
and GABAB conductances in TC cells (87). The mechanism
is the same as that for the slow (ϳ3 Hz) spike and wave,
except that the GABAB component here is sustained and
not phasic as for the 3-Hz spike and wave. Therefore, the
same feedback paradigm as outlined in section IVB5 applied to rat thalamic slices should lead to highly synchronized 5- to 10-Hz oscillations that are different from spindles.
8) Inhibition between the RE and TC cells in the
thalamus is critical in generating spike-and-wave oscillations. The model predicts that fast (5–10 Hz) and slow
(ϳ3 Hz) spike-and-wave oscillations should be transformable into each other by manipulating GABAergic conductances in TC cells (87): 1) enhancing GABAB conductances in TC cells should slow down the frequency of
spike and wave to ϳ3 Hz, 2) blocking GABAB receptors in
TC cells should reduce or suppress seizures, and 3) suppressing thalamic GABAA conductances should either
completely suppress seizures or slow down the faster
spike-and-wave discharges (see details in Ref. 87).
9) The model predicts that corticothalamic synapses
should be efficient targets for antiabsence drugs (86). This
prediction is a direct consequence of the thalamocortical
loop mechanism proposed for generating seizure. There is
currently no selective antagonist for this synapse, but it
should be possible to target these synapses with modern
genetic techniques.
10) The model predicts that the upregulation of Ih by
Ca2ϩ is responsible for the transient nature of absence
seizures. Seizures terminate by the same mechanism as
for spindle waves, by a progressive upregulation of Ih.
This predicts that thalamic infusion of pharmacological
agents that block Ih should lead to long-lasting seizures,
or alternatively, agents that potentiate Ih (for example,
neuromodulators) should shorten the duration of absence
seizures or even suppress them. This is consistent with
the decreased probability of seizures in awake and attentive states compared with slow-wave sleep (179).
11) Models predict that attention can be imple-

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

Physiol Rev • VOL

gether could ultimately lead us to uncover the true nature
of the sleeping brain.
This research was supported by the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, the Medical Research Council of Canada, the Human Frontier Science Program, the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, and the National Institutes of Health.
All simulations reported here were performed using NEURON (153, 154). Supplemental information is available at http://
cns.iaf.cnrs-gif.fr or http://www.cnl.salk.edu/ϳalain.
Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: A.
Destexhe, Unite´ de Neurosciences Inte´ gratives et Computationnelles, CNRS, UPR-2191, Avenue de la Terrasse, Bat. 33, 91198
Gif-sur-Yvette, France (E-mail: Destexhe@iaf.cnrs-gif.fr).

REFERENCES
1. Abel T, Nguyen PV, Barad M, Deuel TAS, Kandel ER, and
Bourtchouladze R. Genetic demonstration of a role for PKA in the
late phase of LTP and in hippocampus-based long-term memory.
Cell 88: 615– 626, 1997.
2. Adams DJ, Smith SJ, and Thompson SH. Ionic currents in
molluscan soma. Annu Rev Neurosci 3: 141–167, 1980.
3. Adrian ED. Afferent discharges to the cerebral cortex from peripheral sense organs. J Physiol 100: 159 –191, 1941.
4. Ahlsen G, Grant K, and Lindstro¨m S. Monosynaptic excitation
of principal cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus by corticofugal
fibers. Brain Res 234: 454 – 458, 1982.
5. Albowitz B and Kuhnt U. Spread of epileptiform potentials in the
neocortical slice: recordings with voltage-sensitive dyes. Brain Res
631: 329 –333, 1993.
6. Alonso A and Llinas RR. Subthreshold Naϩ-dependent theta-like
rhythmicity in stellate cells of entorhinal cortex layer II. Nature
342: 175–177, 1989.
7. Alvarez P, Zola-Morgan S, and Squire LR. Damage limited to
the hippocampal region produces long-lasting memory impairment
in monkeys. J Neurosci 15: 3796 –3807, 1995.
8. Andersen P and Andersson SA. Physiological Basis of the Alpha
Rhythm. New York: Appelton Century Crofts, 1968.
9. Andersen P and Eccles JC. Inhibitory phasing of neuronal discharge. Nature 196: 645– 647, 1962.
10. Andersen P and Rutjord T. Simulation of a neuronal network
operating rhythmically through recurrent inhibition. Nature 204:
289 –190, 1964.
11. Andersen P, Andersson SA, and Lømo T. Nature of thalamocortical relations during spontaneous barbiturate spindle activity.
J Physiol 192: 283–307, 1967.
12. Antal K, Emri Z, Toth TI, and Crunelli V. Model of a thalamocortical neurone with dendritic voltage-gated ion channels. Neuroreport 8: 1063–1066, 1997.
13. Antoniadis G and Kostopoulos G. Simulation study for the transition from spindles to spike and wave epileptogenesis. Med Biol
Engineer Comput 33: 241–246, 1995.
14. Avanzini G, de Curtis M, Panzica F, and Spreafico R. Intrinsic
properties of nucleus reticularis thalami neurones of the rat studied in vitro. J Physiol 416: 111–122, 1989.
15. Avoli M and Gloor P. The effect of transient functional depression of the thalamus on spindles and bilateral synchronous epileptic discharges of feline generalized penicillin epilepsy. Epilepsia
22: 443– 452, 1981.
16. Avoli M, Gloor P, Kostopoulos G, and Gotman J. An analysis of
penicillin-induced generalized spike and wave discharges using
simultaneous recordings of cortical and thalamic single neurons.
J Neurophysiol 50: 819 – 837, 1983.
17. Bal T and McCormick DA. Mechanisms of oscillatory activity in
guinea-pig nucleus reticularis thalami in vitro: a mammalian pacemaker. J Physiol 468: 669 – 691, 1993.
18. Bal T, Debay D, and Destexhe A. Cortical feedback controls the
frequency and synchrony of oscillations in the visual thalamus.
J Neurosci 20: 7478 –7488, 2000.

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

developmental stages, the mapping of the different receptor types in various classes of synapses, as well as the
characterization of their dynamics in fine detail. Progress
in pharmacology and molecular genetics has provided
tools to focus on a given type or subtype of ion channel
and establish its function. One of the conceptual advances
made in our understanding of the genesis of thalamic oscillations is that oscillations can result from the synaptic
interaction between different neuronal types, none of
which alone constitutes an oscillator (see sects. IIIB
and IIIC).
In another conceptual advance, the commonly held
“thalamocentric” view is being replaced by one in which
feedback projections from cortex to thalamus are crucial.
Corticothalamic feedback is needed to account for the
initiation, spread, and termination of oscillations (see
sect. IVA), as well as pathological states. This new view
agrees with morphological observations that the majority
of thalamic synapses originate from cortical axons (115,
116, 197, 198). Thus the thalamocortical system is a loop
in which the “feed-forward” part is the classic pathway
relaying sensory information to cortex and the “feedback”
part is the control of the cortex over thalamic operations,
which may be excitatory or inhibitory depending on cortical activity, and possibly implement attentional mechanisms (88). Sensory information in this view serves to
modulate this intrinsic activity (203).
New methods are needed to investigate this intricate
web of molecular properties and relate it to the macroscopic behavior of neuronal populations. By integrating
both electrophysiological and molecular data, computational models can be an efficient way to improve our
interpretation of experimental data and try to assemble
them into a coherent framework, as we have done here.
This approach has made it possible to integrate knowledge of thalamic and thalamocortical oscillations from
the molecular level to large-scale networks (106b). Not
only the models reproduced experiments, but they have
also generated a multitude of predictions that motivated
new experiments and a new generation of models. This
experimental-modeling loop has been realized in studies
in which computational models and real neurons interact
in functional circuits (193, 194, 259). Theory and experiment have led to important advances in physics, and the
same approach could also be effective in biology.
Finally, accurate models can be used in exploring
possible functions for these oscillations. We reviewed
here a possible role for slow-wave sleep oscillations in
synaptic plasticity. The fact that we are now able to
propose plausible mechanisms that are compatible with
the available experimental data is itself an important milestone. The proposed hypotheses are probably incomplete
or even incorrect, but we anticipate they will trigger
imaginative experiments and better models, which to-

1445

1446

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

Physiol Rev • VOL

45.
46.
47.
48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

by intracellular Ca2ϩ of the hyperpolarization-activated cation current in rat thalamic neurones. J Physiol 503: 79 – 85, 1997.
Burke W and Sefton AJ. Inhibitory mechanisms in lateral geniculate nucleus of rat. J Physiol 187: 231–246, 1966.
Buzsa´ ki G. Two-stage model of memory trace formation: a role for
“noisy” brain states. Neuroscience 31: 551–570, 1989.
Buzsa´ ki G. The hippocampo-neocortical dialogue. Cerebral Cortex
6: 81–92, 1996.
Buzsa´ ki G, Bickford RG, Ponomareff G, Thal LJ, Mandel R,
and Gage FH. Nucleus basalis and thalamic control of neocortical
activity in the freely moving rat. J Neurosci 8: 4007– 4026, 1988.
Carbone E and Lux HD. A low voltage-activated, fully inactivating Ca channel in vertebrate sensory neurones. Nature 310: 501–
502, 1984.
Carbone E and Lux HD. A low voltage-activated calcium conductance in embryonic chick sensory neurons. Biophys J 46: 413– 418,
1984.
Carr DW, Stofko-Hahn RE, Fraser ID, Cone RD, and Scott JD.
Localization of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase to the postsynaptic densities by A-kinase anchoring proteins. Characterization of
AKAP 79. J Biol Chem 267: 16816 –16823, 1992.
Castro-Alamancos MA. Neocortical synchronized oscillations induced by thalamic disinhibition in vivo. J Neurosci Online 19:
RC27, 1999.
Chagnac-Amitai Y and Connors BW. Horizontal spread of synchronized activity in neocortex and its control by GABA-mediated
inhibition. J Neurophysiol 61: 747–758, 1989.
Chrobak JJ and Buzsa´ ki G. Selective activation of deep layer
(V-VI) retrohippocampal cortical neurons during hippocampal
sharp waves in the behaving rat. J Neurosci 14: 6160 – 6170, 1994.
Connor JA and Stevens CF. Inward and delayed outward membrane currents in isolated neural somata under voltage clamp.
J Physiol 213: 1–19, 1971.
Connor JA and Stevens CF. Voltage clamp studies of a transient
outward membrane current in gastropod neural somata. J Physiol
213: 21–30, 1971.
Connor JA and Stevens CF. Prediction of repetitive firing behaviour from voltage clamp data on an isolated neurone soma.
J Physiol 213: 31–53, 1971.
Contreras D. Oscillatory Properties of Cortical and Thalamic
Neurons and the Generation of Synchronized Rhythmicity in the
Corticothalamic Network (PhD thesis). Que´ bec, Canada: Laval
Univ., 1996.
Contreras D, Curro Dossi R, and Steriade M. Electrophysiological properties of cat reticular thalamic neurones in vivo. J Physiol
470: 273–294, 1993.
Contreras D, Destexhe A, Sejnowski TJ, and Steriade M.
Control of spatiotemporal coherence of a thalamic oscillation by
corticothalamic feedback. Science 274: 771–774, 1996.
Contreras D, Destexhe A, Sejnowski TJ, and Steriade M.
Spatiotemporal patterns of spindle oscillations in cortex and thalamus. J Neurosci 17: 1179 –1196, 1997.
Contreras D, Destexhe A, and Steriade M. Spindle oscillations
during cortical spreading depression in naturally sleeping cats.
Neuroscience 77: 933–936, 1997.
Contreras D, Destexhe A, and Steriade M. Intracellular and
computational characterization of the intracortical inhibitory control of synchronized thalamic inputs in vivo. J Neurophysiol 78:
335–350, 1997.
Contreras D and Llina´ s RR. Voltage-sensitive dye imaging of
neocortical spatiotemporal dynamics to afferent activation frequency. J Neurosci 21: 9403–9413, 2001.
Contreras D and Steriade M. Cellular basis of EEG slow
rhythms: a study of dynamic corticothalamic relationships. J Neurosci 15: 604 – 622, 1995.
Contreras D and Steriade M. Spindle oscillation in cats: the role
of corticothalamic feedback in a thalamically-generated rhythm.
J Physiol 490: 159 –179, 1996.
Coulter DA, Huguenard JR, and Prince DA. Calcium currents in
rat thalamocortical relay neurones: kinetic properties of the transient, low-threshold current. J Physiol 414: 587– 604, 1989.
Creutzfeldt O, Watanabe S, and Lux HD. Relation between EEG
phenomena and potentials of single cortical cells. I. Evoked re-

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

19. Bal T and McCormick DA. What stops synchronized thalamocortical oscillations? Neuron 17: 297–308, 1996.
20. Bal T, von Krosigk M, and McCormick DA. Synaptic and membrane mechanisms underlying synchronized oscillations in the ferret LGN in vitro. J Physiol 483: 641– 663, 1995.
21. Bal T, von Krosigk M, and McCormick DA. Role of the ferret
perigeniculate nucleus in the generation of synchronized oscillations in vitro. J Physiol 483: 665– 685, 1995.
22. Ball GJ, Gloor P, and Schaul N. The cortical electromicrophysiology of pathological delta waves in the electroencephalogram of
cats. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 43: 346 –361, 1977.
23. Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, and Sejnowski TJ. Selfsustained rhythmic activity in the thalamic reticular nucleus mediated by depolarizing GABAA receptor potentials. Nature Neurosci
2: 168 –174, 1999.
24. Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, and Sejnowski TJ. Spiking-bursting activity in the thalamic reticular nucleus initiates sequences of spindle oscillations in thalamic networks. J Neurophysiol 84: 1076 –1087, 2000.
25. Berger H. u¨ ber den zeitlichen verlauf der negativen schwankung
des nervenstroms. Arch Ges Physiol 1: 173, 1929.
26. Berridge MJ. Neuronal calcium signaling. Neuron 21: 13–26, 1998.
27. Bhalla US and Iyengar R. Emergent properties of networks of
biological signaling pathways. Science 283: 381–387, 1999.
28. Bishop GH. The interpretation of cortical potentials. Cold Spring
Harbor Symp Quant Biol 4: 305–319, 1936.
29. Blitzer RD, Connor JH, Brown GP, Wong T, Shenolikar S,
Iyengar R, and Landau EM. Gating of CaMKII by cAMP-regulated
protein phosphatase activity during LTP. Science 280: 1940 –1942,
1998.
30. Blitzer RD, Wong T, Nouranifar R, Iyengar R, and Landau EM.
Postsynaptic cAMP pathway gates early LTP in hippocampal CA1
region. Neuron 15: 1403–1414, 1995.
31. Blumenfeld H and McCormick DA. Corticothalamic inputs control the pattern of activity generated in thalamocortical networks.
J Neurosci 20: 5153–5162, 2000.
32. Boland LM and Bean BP. Modulation of N-type calcium channels
in bullfrog sympathetic neurons by luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone: kinetics and voltage dependence. J Neurosci 13: 516 –
533, 1993.
33. Bonnet V and Bremer F. E´ tude des potentiels e´ lectriques de la
moelle e´ pinie`re faisant suite chez la grenouille spinale a` une ou
deux volle´ es d’influx centripe`tes. C R Soc Biol Paris 127: 806 – 812,
1938.
34. Bontempi B, Laurent-Demir C, Destrade C, and Jaffard R.
Time-dependent reorganization of brain circuitry underlying longterm memory storage. Nature 400: 671– 675, 1999.
35. Borg-Graham LJ, Monier C, and Fre´ gnac Y. Visual input evokes
transient and strong shunting inhibition in visual cortical neurons.
Nature 393: 369 –373, 1998.
36. Bouwman BM, van den Broek PL, van Luijtelaar G, and van
Rijn CM. The effects of vigabatrin on type II spike wave discharges
in rats. Neurosci Lett 338: 177–180, 2003.
37. Bremer F. Effets de la de´ affe´ rentation comple`te d’une re´ gion de
l’e´ corce ce´ re´ brale sur son activite´ e´ lectrique. C R Soc Biol Paris
127: 355–359, 1938.
38. Bremer F. L’activite´ e´ lectrique de l’e´ corce ce´ re´ brale. Actual Sci
Industriel 658: 3– 46, 1938.
39. Bremer F. Conside´ rations sur l’origine et la nature des “ondes”
ce´ re´ brales. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1: 177–193,
1949.
40. Bremer F. Cerebral and cerebellar potentials. Physiol Rev 38:
357–388, 1958.
41. Bremer F, Brihaye J, and Andre´ -Balisaux G. Physiologie et
pathologie du corps calleux. Schweiz Arch Neurol Psychiat 78:
31– 87, 1956.
42. Bringuier V, Chavane F, Glaeser L, and Fre´ gnac Y. Horizontal
propagation of visual activity in the synaptic integration field of
area 17 neurons. Science 283: 695– 699, 1999.
43. Brock LG, Coombs JS, and Eccles JC. The recording of potential
from monotneurones with an intracellular electrode. J Physiol 117:
431– 460, 1952.
44. Budde T, Biella G, Munsch T, and Pape HC. Lack of regulation

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

78.
79.

80.
81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.
87.

88.

89.
90.

91.

95.

Physiol Rev • VOL

nisms for intrinsic slow oscillations in thalamic relay neurons.
Biophys J 65: 1538 –1552, 1993.
96. Destexhe A, Bal T, McCormick DA, and Sejnowski TJ. Ionic
mechanisms underlying synchronized oscillations and propagating
waves in a model of ferret thalamic slices. J Neurophysiol 76:
2049 –2070, 1996.
97. Destexhe A, Contreras D, Sejnowski TJ, and Steriade M. A
model of spindle rhythmicity in the isolated thalamic reticular
nucleus. J Neurophysiol 72: 803– 818, 1994.
98. Destexhe A, Contreras D, Sejnowski TJ, and Steriade M.
Modeling the control of reticular thalamic oscillations by neuromodulators. Neuroreport 5: 2217–2220, 1994.
99. Destexhe A, Contreras D, Steriade M, Sejnowski TJ, and
Huguenard JR. In vivo, in vitro and computational analysis of
dendritic calcium currents in thalamic reticular neurons. J Neurosci 16: 169 –185, 1996.
100. Destexhe A, Contreras D, and Steriade M. Mechanisms underlying the synchronizing action of corticothalamic feedback through
inhibition of thalamic relay cells. J Neurophysiol 79: 999 –1016,
1998.
101. Destexhe A, Contreras D, and Steriade M. Spatiotemporal analysis of local field potentials and unit discharges in cat cerebral
cortex during natural wake and sleep states. J Neurosci 19: 4595–
4608, 1999.
102. Destexhe A, Contreras D, and Steriade M. Cortically-induced
coherence of a thalamic-generated oscillation. Neuroscience 92:
427– 443, 1999.
103. Destexhe A, Contreras D, and Steriade M. LTS cells in cerebral
cortex and their role in generating spike-and-wave oscillations.
Neurocomputing 38: 555–563, 2001.
104. Destexhe A, Mainen Z, and Sejnowski TJ. Kinetic models of
synaptic transmission. In: Methods in Neuronal Modeling, edited
by Koch C and Segev I. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 1998, p. 1–26.
105. Destexhe A, McCormick DA, and Sejnowski TJ. A model for
8 –10 Hz spindling in interconnected thalamic relay and reticularis
neurons. Biophys J 65: 2474 –2478, 1993.
106. Destexhe A, Neubig M, Ulrich D, and Huguenard JR. Dendritic
low-threshold calcium currents in thalamic relay cells. J Neurosci
18: 3574 –3588, 1998.
106a.Destexhe A and Sejnowski TJ. G-protein activation kinetics and
spill-over of GABA may account for differences between inhibitory
responses in the hippocampus and thalamus. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 92: 9515–9519, 1995.
106b.Destexhe A and Sejnowski TJ. Thalamocortical Assemblies.
Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press, 2001.
106c.Destexhe A and Sejnowski TJ. The initiation of bursts in thalamic neurons and the cortical control of thalamic sensitivity. Phil
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 357: 1649 –1657, 2002.
107. Domich L, Oakson G, and Steriade M. Thalamic burst patterns
in the naturally sleeping cat: a comparison between cortically
projecting and reticularis neurones. J Physiol 379: 429 – 449, 1986.
108. Dosemeci A and Reese TS. Inhibition of endogenous phosphatase in a postsynaptic density fraction allows extensive phosphorylation of the major postsynaptic density protein. J Neurochem 61:
550 –555, 1993.
109. Dutar P and Nicoll RA. A physiological role for GABAA receptors
in the central nervous system. Nature 332: 156 –158, 1988.
110. Eccles JC. Interpretation of action potentials evoked in the cerebral cortex. J Neurophysiol 3: 449 – 464, 1951.
111. Eckhorn R, Bauer R, Jordan W, Brosch M, Kruse W, Munk M,
and Reitboek HJ. Coherent oscillations: a mechanism of feature
linking in the visual cortex? Multiple electrode and correlation
analyses in the cat. Biol Cybernetics 60: 121–130, 1988.
112. Edeline JM, Manunta Y, and Hennevin E. Auditory thalamus
neurons during sleep: changes in frequency selectivity, threshold,
and receptive field size. J Neurophysiol 84: 934 –952, 2000.
113. Emri Z, Antal K, Toth TI, Cope DW, and Crunelli V. Backpropagation of the delta oscillation and the retinal excitatory
postsynaptic potential in a multi-compartment model of thalamocortical neurons. Neuroscience 98: 111–127, 2000.
114. Erickson KR, Ronnekleiv OK, and Kelly MJ. Electrophysiology
of guinea-pig supraoptic neurones: role of a hyperpolarization-

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

77.

sponses after thalamic and epicortical stimulation. EEG Clin Neurophysiol 20: 1–18, 1966.
Creutzfeldt O, Watanabe S, and Lux HD. Relation between EEG
phenomena and potentials of single cortical cells. II. Spontaneous
and convulsoid activity. EEG Clin Neurophysiol 20: 19 –37, 1966.
Cruikshank SJ and Weinberger NM. Receptive-field plasticity in
the adult auditory cortex induced by Hebbian covariance. J Neurosci 16: 861– 875, 1996.
Crunelli V, Lightowler S, and Pollard CE. A T-type Ca2ϩ current
underlies low-threshold Ca2ϩ potentials in cells of the cat and rat
lateral geniculate nucleus. J Physiol 413: 543–561, 1989.
Crunelli V, Soltesz I, Toth TI, Turner J, and Leresche N.
Intrinsic low-frequency oscillations of thalamocortical cells and
their modulation by synaptic potentials. In: Thalamic Networks for
Relay and Modulation, edited by Miniciacchi A, Molinari M, Macchi G, and Jones EG. New York: Pergamon, 1993, p. 375–384.
Curro Dossi R, Nunez A, and Steriade M. Electrophysiology of
a slow (0.5– 4 Hz) intrinsic oscillation of cat thalamocortical neurones in vivo J Physiol 447: 215–234, 1992.
Danober L, Deransart C, Depaulis A, Vergnes M, and Marescaux C. Pathophysiological mechanisms of genetic absence epilepsy in the rat. Prog Neurobiol 55: 27–57, 1988.
Davies CH, Davies SN, and Collingridge GL. Paired-pulse depression of monosynaptic GABA-mediated inhibitory postsynaptic
responses in rat hippocampus. J Physiol 424: 513–531, 1990.
Debarbieux F, Brunton J, and Charpak S. Effect of bicuculline
on thalamic activity: a direct blockade of IAHP in reticularis neurons. J Neurophysiol 79: 2911–2918, 1998.
DeFelipe J and Farin˜ as I. The pyramidal neuron of the cerebral
cortex: morphological and chemical characteristics of the synaptic
inputs. Prog Neurobiol 39: 563– 607, 1992.
De Koninck P and Schulman H. Sensitivity of CaM kinase II to
the frequency of Ca2ϩ oscillations. Science 279: 227–230, 1998.
De la Pena E and Geijo-Barrientos E. Laminar organization,
morphology and physiological properties of pyramidal neurons
that have the low-threshold calcium current in the guinea-pig frontal cortex. J Neurosci 16: 5301–5311, 1996.
Dement W. The effect of dream deprivation. Science 131: 1705–
1707, 1960.
Derbyshire AJ, Rempel B, Forbes A, and Lambert EF. The
effects of anesthetics on action potentials in the cerebral cortex of
the cat. Am J Physiol 116: 577–596, 1936.
Descheˆ nes M and Hu B. Electrophysiology and pharmacology of
the corticothalamic input to lateral thalamic nuclei: an intracellular
study in the cat. Eur J Neurosci 2: 140 –152, 1990.
Descheˆ nes M, Madariaga-Domich A, and Steriade M. Dendrodendritic synapses in the cat reticularis thalami nucleus: a structural basis for thalamic spindle synchronization. Brain Res 334:
165–168, 1985.
Descheˆ nes M, Paradis M, Roy JP, and Steriade M. Electrophysiology of neurons of lateral thalamic nuclei in cat: resting properties and burst discharges. J Neurophysiol 55: 1196 –1219, 1984.
Destexhe A. Nonlinear Dynamics of the Rhythmical Activity of
the Brain (PhD thesis). Brussels, Belgium: Universite´ Libre de
Bruxelles, 1992.
Destexhe A. Spike-and-wave oscillations based on the properties
of GABAA receptors. J Neurosci 18: 9099 –9111, 1998.
Destexhe A. Can GABAA conductances explain the fast oscillation
frequency of absence seizures in rodents? Eur J Neurosci 11:
2175–2181, 1998.
Destexhe A. Modeling corticothalamic feedback and the gating of
the thalamus by the cerebral cortex. J Physiol (Paris) 94: 391– 410,
2000.
Destexhe A and Babloyantz A. Pacemaker-induced coherence in
cortical networks. Neural Computat 3: 145–154, 1991.
Destexhe A and Babloyantz A. Cortical coherent activity induced by thalamic oscillations. In: Neural Network Dynamics,
edited by Taylor JG, Caianello ER, Cotterill RMJ, and Clark JW.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1992, p. 234 –249.
Destexhe A and Babloyantz A. A model of the inward current Ih
and its possible role in thalamocortical oscillations. Neuroreport 4:
223–226, 1993.
Destexhe A, Babloyantz A, and Sejnowski TJ. Ionic mecha-

1447

1448

115.

116.

117.

118.
119.

120.
121.
122.

123.

125.

126.
127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.
134.
135.

136.
137.

138.

activated cation current in phasic firing. J Physiol 460: 407– 425,
1993.
Erisir A, VanHorn SC, Bickford ME, and Sherman SM. Immunocytochemistry and distribution of parabrachial terminals in the
lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat: a comparison with corticogeniculate terminals. J Comp Neurol 377: 535–549, 1997.
Erisir A, VanHorn SC, and Sherman SM. Relative numbers of
cortical and brainstem inputs to the lateral geniculate nucleus. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 94: 1517–1520, 1997.
Evarts EV. Temporal patterns of discharge of pyramidal tract
neurons during sleep and waking in the monkey. J Neurophysiol
27: 152–171, 1964.
Fishbein W and Gutwein BM. Paradoxical sleep and memory
storage processes. Behav Biol 19: 425– 464, 1977.
FitzGibbon T, Tevah LV, and Jervie-Sefton A. Connections
between the reticular nucleus of the thalamus and pulvinar-lateralis posterior complex: a WGA-HRP study. J Comp Neurol 363:
489 –504, 1995.
Fowler MJ, Sullivan MJ, and Ekstrand BR. Sleep and memory.
Science 179: 302–304, 1973.
Frank MG, Issa NP, and Stryker MP. Sleep enhances plasticity
in the developing visual cortex. Neuron 30: 275–287, 2001.
Frey U, Huang YY, and Kandel ER. Effects of cAMP simulate a
late phase of LTP in hippocampal CA1 neurons. Science 260: 1661–
1664, 1993.
Frost JD, Kellaway PR, and Gol A. Single-unit discharges in
isolated cerebral cortex. Exp Neurol 14: 305–316, 1966.
Gais S, Plihal W, Wagner U, and Born J. Early sleep triggers
memory for early visual discrimination skills. Nat Neurosci 3:
1335–1339, 2000.
Galligan JJ, Tatsumi H, Shen KZ, Surprenant A, and North
RA. Cation current activated by hyperpolarization (Ih) in guinea pig
enteric neurons. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 259:
G966 –G972, 1990.
Getting PA. Emerging principles governing the operation of neuronal networks. Annu Rev Neurosci 12: 185–204, 1989.
Ghosh A and Greenberg ME. Calcium signaling in neurons: molecular mechanisms and cellular consequences. Science 268: 239 –
247, 1995.
Gibbs JW, Berkow-Schroeder G, and Coulter DA. GABAA receptor function in developing rat thalamic reticular neurons: whole
cell recordings of GABA-mediated currents and modulation by
clonazepam. J Neurophysiol 76: 2568 –2579, 1996.
Gloor P and Fariello RG. Generalized epilepsy: some of its cellular mechanisms differ from those of focal epilepsy. Trends Neurosci 11: 63– 68, 1988.
Gloor P, Quesney LF, and Zumstein H. Pathophysiology of
generalized penicillin epilepsy in the cat: the role of cortical and
subcortical structures. II. Topical application of penicillin to the
cerebral cortex and subcortical structures. EEG Clin Neurophysiol
43: 79 –94, 1977.
Gluck MA and Myers CE. Gateway to Memory: An Introduction
to Neural Network Modeling of the Hippocampus and Learning.
Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2000.
Golard A and Siegelbaum SA. Kinetic basis for the voltagedependent inhibition of N-type calcium current by somatostatin
and norepinephrine in chick sympathetic neurons. J Neurosci 13:
3884 –3894, 1993.
Golomb D and Rinzel J. Dynamics of globally coupled inhibitory
neurons with heterogeneity. Phys Rev E 48: 4810 – 4814, 1993.
Golomb D and Rinzel J. Clustering in globally coupled inhibitory
neurons. Physica 72: 259 –282, 1994.
Golomb D, Wang XJ, and Rinzel J. Synchronization properties of
spindle oscillations in a thalamic reticular nucleus model. J Neurophysiol 72: 1109 –1126, 1994.
Golomb D, Wang XJ, and Rinzel J. Propagation of spindle waves
in a thalamic slice model. J Neurophysiol 75: 750 –769, 1996.
Golshani P, Liu XB, and Jones EG. Differences in quantal amplitude reflect GluR4-subunit number at corticothalamic synapses
on two populations of thalamic neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
98: 4172– 4177, 2001.
Gonzalo-Ruiz A and Lieberman AR. Topographic organization of
Physiol Rev • VOL

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.
144.

145.

146.
147.

148.

149.

150.
151.

152.

153.

154.
155.

156.
157.

158.

159.

160.

161.

162.

163.

projections from the thalamic reticular nucleus to the anterior
thalamic nuclei in the rat. Brain Res Bull 37: 17–35, 1995.
Gray CM and Singer W. Stimulus-specific neuronal oscillations in
orientation columns of cat visual cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
86: 1698 –1702, 1989.
Grinvald A, Lieke EE, Frostig RD, and Hildesheim R. Cortical
point-spread function and long-range lateral interactions revealed
by real-time optical imaging of macaque monkey primary visual
cortex. J Neurosci 14: 2545–2568, 1994.
Gu X and Spitzer NC. Distinct aspects of neuronal differentiation
encoded by frequency of spontaneous Ca2ϩ transients. Nature 375:
784 –787, 1995.
Guido W, Lu SM, and Sherman SM. Relative contributions of
burst and tonic responses to the receptive field properties of lateral
geniculate neurons in the cat. J Neurophysiol 68: 2199 –2211, 1992.
Guido W and Weyand T. Burst responses in thalamic relay cells of
the awake behaving cat. J Neurophysiol 74: 1782–1786, 1995.
Hagiwara N and Irisawa H. Modulation by intracellular Ca2ϩ of
the hyperpolarization-activated inward current in rabbit single
sino-atrial node cells. J Physiol 409: 121–141, 1989.
Hamos JE, Van Horn SC, Raczkowski D, and Sherman SM.
Synaptic circuits involving an individual retinogeniculate axon in
the cat. J Comp Neurol 259: 165–192, 1987.
Harris-Warrick RM and Marder E. Modulation of neural networks for behavior. Annu Rev Neurosci 14: 39 –57, 1991.
Herculano-Houzel S, Munk MH, Neuenschwander S, and
Singer W. Precisely synchronized oscillatory firing patterns require electroencephalographic activation. J Neurosci 19: 3992–
4010, 1999.
Hernandez-Cruz A and Pape HC. Identification of two calcium
currents in acutely dissociated neurons from the rat lateral geniculate nucleus. J Neurophysiol 61: 1270 –1283, 1989.
Hersch SM and White EL. Thalamocortical synapses on corticothalamic projections neurons in mouse SmI cortex: electron microscopic demonstration of a monosynaptic feedback loop. Neurosci
Lett 24: 207–210, 1981.
Hille B. Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes (3rd ed.). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer, 2001.
Hindmarsh JL and Rose RM. A model for rebound bursting in
mammalian neurons. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 346:
129 –150, 1994.
Hindmarsh JL and Rose RM. A model of intrinsic and driven
spindling in thalamocortical neurons. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B
Biol Sci 346: 165–183, 1994.
Hines ML. NEURON: a program for simulation of nerve equations.
In: Neural Systems: Analysis and Modeling, edited by Eeckman F.
Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic, p. 127–136.
Hines ML and Carnevale NT. The NEURON simulation environment. Neural Computat 9: 1179 –1209, 1997.
Hinton GE, Dayan P, Frey BJ, and Neal RM. The “wake-sleep”
algorithm for unsupervised neural networks. Science 268: 1158 –
1161, 1995.
Hobson JA. The Dreaming Brain. New York: Basic, 1988.
Hodgkin AL and Huxley AF. A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in
nerve. J Physiol 117: 500 –544, 1952.
Horne JA and McGrath MJ. The consolidation hypothesis for
REM sleep function: stress and other confounding factors—a review. Biol Psychol 18: 165–184, 1984.
Hosford DA, Clark S, Cao Z, Wilson WA Jr, Lin FH, Morrisett
RA, and Huin A. The role of GABAB receptor activation in absence
seizures of lethargic (lh/lh) mice. Science 257: 398 – 401, 1992.
Hosford DA, Wang Y, and Cao Z. Differential effects mediated by
GABAA receptors in thalamic nuclei of lh/lh model of absence
seizures. Epilepsy Res 27: 55– 65, 1997.
Hughes SW, Cope DW, and Crunelli V. Dynamic clamp study of
Ih modulation of burst firing and delta oscillations in thalamocortical neurons in vitro. Neuroscience 87: 541–550, 1998.
Huguenard JR and McCormick DA. Simulation of the currents
involved in rhythmic oscillations in thalamic relay neurons. J Neurophysiol 68: 1373–1383, 1992.
Huguenard JR and Prince DA. A novel T-type current underlies

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

124.

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

164.

165.

166.

167.

168.

169.

170.

171.

173.
174.
175.

176.
177.

178.

179.
180.

181.

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

187.

Physiol Rev • VOL

188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

194.

195.

196.

197.

198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

203.
204.

205.

206.

207.

208.

209.
210.

generalized penicillin epilepsy: microphysiological features. Exp
Neurol 73: 55–77, 1981.
Lagerlund TD and Sharbrough FW. Computer simulation of
neuronal circuit models of rhythmic behavior in the electroencephalogram. Comput Biol Med 18: 267–304, 1988.
Landisman CE, Long MA, Beierlein M, Deans MR, Paul DL,
and Connors BW. Electrical synapses in the thalamic reticular
nucleus. J Neurosci 22: 1002–1009, 2002.
Leresche N, Jassik-Gerschenfeld D, Haby M, Soltesz I, and
Crunelli V. Pacemaker-like and other types of spontaneous membrane potential oscillations in thalamocortical cells. Neurosci Lett
113: 72–77, 1990.
Leresche N, Lightowler S, Soltesz I, Jassik-Gerschenfeld D,
and Crunelli V. Low-frequency oscillatory activities intrinsic to rat
and cat thalamocortical cells. J Physiol 441: 155–174, 1991.
Lee JH, Daud A, Cribbs LL, Lacerda AE, Pereverzev A, Klo¨ ckner U, Schneider T, and Perez-Reyes E. Cloning and expression
of a novel member of the low voltage-activated T-type calcium
channel family. J Neurosci 19: 1912–1921, 1999.
LeMasson G, Renaud-LeMasson S, Debay D, and Bal T. Feedback inhibition controls spike transfer in hybrid thalamic circuits.
Nature 417: 854 – 858, 2002.
LeMasson G, Renaud-LeMasson S, Sharp A, Abbott LF, and
Marder E. Real time interaction between a model neuron and the
crustacean somatogastric nervous system. Soc Neurosci Abstr 18:
1055, 1992.
Li W, Llopis J, Whitney M, Zlokarnik G, and Tsien RY. Cellpermanent caged InsP3 ester shows that Ca2ϩ spike frequency can
optimize gene expression. Nature 392: 936 –941, 1998.
Lindstro¨ m S. Synaptic organization of inhibitory pathways to
principal cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. Brain
Res 234: 447– 453, 1982.
Liu XB, Honda CN, and Jones EG. Distribution of four types of
synapse on physiologically identified relay neurons in the ventral
posterior thalamic nucleus of the cat. J Comp Neurol 352: 69 –91,
1995.
Liu XB and Jones EG. Predominance of corticothalamic synaptic
inputs to thalamic reticular nucleus neurons in the rat. J Comp
Neurol 414: 67–79, 1999.
Liu Z, Vergnes M, Depaulis A, and Marescaux C. Evidence for
a critical role of GABAergic transmission within the thalamus in the
genesis and control of absence seizures in the rat. Brain Res 545:
1–7, 1991.
Liu Z, Vergnes M, Depaulis A, and Marescaux C. Involvement
of intrathalamic GABAB neurotransmission in the control of absence seizures in the rat. Neuroscience 48: 87–93, 1992.
Livingstone MS and Hubel DH. Effects of sleep and arousal on
the processing of visual information in the cat. Nature 291: 554 –
561, 1981.
Llina´ s RR. The intrinsic electrophysiological properties of mammalian neurons: a new insight into CNS function. Science 242:
1654 –1664, 1988.
Llina´ s RR and Pare´ D. Of dreaming and wakefulness. Neuroscience 44: 521–535, 1991.
Llina´ s RR and Sugimori M. Electrophysiological properties of in
vitro Purkinje cell somata in mammalian cerebellar slices.
J Physiol 305: 171–195, 1980.
Llina´ s RR and Sugimori M. Electrophysiological properties of in
vitro Purkinje cell dendrites in mammalian cerebellar slices.
J Physiol 305: 197–213, 1980.
Llina´ s R and Yarom Y. Electrophysiology of mammalian inferior
olivary neurones in vitro. Different types of voltage-dependent
ionic conductances. J Physiol 315: 549 –567, 1981.
Llina´ s R and Yarom Y. Properties and distribution of ionic conductances generating electroresponsiveness of mammalian inferior
olivary neurones in vitro. J Physiol 315: 569 –584, 1981.
Llina´ s RR and Geijo-Barrientos E. In vitro studies of mammalian thalamic and reticularis thalami neurons. In: Cellular Thalamic Mechanisms, edited by Bentivoglio M and Spreafico R. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1988, p. 23–33.
Llina´ s RR and Jahnsen H. Electrophysiology of thalamic neurones in vitro. Nature 297: 406 – 408, 1982.
Lopes da Silva FH, Hoeks A, Smits H, and Zetterberg LH.

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

172.

prolonged calcium-dependent burst firing in GABAergic neurons of
rat thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurosci 12: 3804 –3817, 1992.
Huguenard JR and Prince DA. Clonazepam suppresses GABAAmediated inhibition in thalamic relay neurons through effects in
nucleus reticularis. J Neurophysiol 71: 2576 –2581, 1994.
Huguenard JR and Prince DA. Intrathalamic rhythmicity studied
in vitro: nominal T-current modulation causes robust anti-oscillatory effects. J Neurosci 14: 5485–5502, 1994.
Huntsman MM, Porcello DM, Homanics GE, DeLorey TM, and
Huguenard JR. Reciprocal inhibitory connections and network
synchrony in the mammalian thalamus. Science 283: 541–543, 1999.
Imbert M and Buisseret P. Receptive field characteristics and
plastic properties of visual cortical cells in kittens reared with or
without visual experience. Exp Brain Res 22: 25–36, 1975.
Inoue M, Duysens J, Vossen JMH, and Coenen AML. Thalamic
multiple-unit activity underlying spike-wave discharges in anesthetized rats. Brain Res 612: 35– 40, 1993.
Ito H, Tung RT, Sugimoto T, Kobayashi I, Takahashi K,
Katada T, Ui M, and Kurachi Y. On the mechanism of G-protein
beta gamma subunit activation of the muscarinic Kϩ channel in
guinea pig atrial cell membrane. Comparison with the ATP-sensitive Kϩ channel. J Gen Physiol 99: 961–983, 1992.
Jacobsen RB, Ulrich D, and Huguenard JR. GABA(B) and
NMDA receptors contribute to spindle-like oscillations in rat thalamus in vitro. J Neurophysiol 86: 1365–1375, 2001.
Jahnsen H and Llina´ s RR. Electrophysiological properties of
guinea-pig thalamic neurons: an in vitro study. J Physiol 349:
205–226, 1984.
Jahnsen H and Llina´ s RR. Ionic basis for the electroresponsiveness and oscillatory properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurons in
vitro. J Physiol 349: 227–247, 1984.
Jasper H and Kershman J. Electroencephalographic classification of the epilepsies. Arch Neurol Physchiat 45: 903–943, 1941.
Jones EG. The Thalamus. New York: Plenum, 1985.
Kamondi A and Reiner PB. Hyperpolarization-activated inward
current in histaminergic tuberomammillary neurons of the rat hypothalamus. J Neurophysiol 66: 1902–1911, 1991.
Kandel ER. Cellular Basis of Behavior. San Francisco, CA: Freeman, 1976.
Kao CQ and Coulter DA. Physiology and pharmacology of corticothalamic stimulation-evoked responses in rat somatosensory
thalamic neurons in vitro. J Neurophysiol 77: 2661–2676, 1997.
Kapur N and Brooks DJ. Temporally-specific retrograde amnesia
in two cases of discrete bilateral hippocampal pathology. Hippocampus 9: 247–254, 1999.
Kellaway P. Sleep and epilepsy. Epilepsia 26 Suppl: S15–S30,
1985.
Kennedy MB, Bennett MK, and Erondu NE. Biochemical and
immunochemical evidence that the “major postsynaptic density
protein” is a subunit of a calmodulin-dependent protein kinase.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 80: 7357–7361, 1983.
Kim D, Song U, Keum S, Lee T, Jeong MJ, Kim SS, McEnery
MW, and Shin HS. Lack of the burst firing of thalamocortical relay
neurons and resistance to absence seizures in mice lacking the ␣1G
T-type Ca2ϩ channels. Neuron 31: 35– 45, 2001.
Kim U, Bal T, and McCormick DA. Spindle waves are propagating synchronized oscillations in the ferret LGNd in vitro. J Neurophysiol 74: 1301–1323, 1995.
Kim U, Sanchez-Vives MV, and McCormick DA. Functional
dynamics of GABAergic inhibition in the thalamus. Science 278:
130 –134, 1997.
Klee MR, Offenloch K, and Tigges J. Cross-correlation analysis
of electroencephalographic potentials and slow membrane transients. Science 147: 519 –521, 1965.
Kopell N and LeMasson G. Rhythmogenesis, amplitude modulation, and multiplexing in a cortical architecture. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 91: 10586 –10590, 1994.
Kostopoulos G, Gloor P, Pellegrini A, and Siatitsas I. A study
of the transition from spindles to spike and wave discharge in feline
generalized penicillin epilepsy: EEG features. Exp Neurol 73: 43–
54, 1981.
Kostopoulos G, Gloor P, Pellegrini A, and Gotman J. A study
of the transition from spindles to spike and wave discharge in feline

1449

1450

211.

212.

213.

214.
215.
216.

217.

218.

219.

221.

222.

223.

224.

225.

226.

227.

228.

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

Model of brain rhythmic activity, the alpha rhythm of the thalamus.
Kybernetik 15: 27–37, 1974.
Lu¨ thi A, Bal T, and McCormick DA. Periodicity of thalamic
spindle waves is abolished by ZD7288, a blocker of Ih. J Neurophysiol 79: 3284 –3289, 1998.
Lu¨ thi A and McCormick DA. Periodicity of thalamic synchronized oscillations: the role of Ca2ϩ-mediated upregulation of Ih.
Neuron 20: 553–563, 1998.
Lu¨ thi A and McCormick DA. Modulation of a pacemaker current
through Ca2ϩ-induced stimulation of cAMP production. Nature
Neurosci 2: 634 – 641, 1999.
Lytton W and Sejnowski TJ. Computer model of ethosuximide’s
effect on a thalamic cell. Ann Neurol 32: 131–139, 1992.
Lytton WW. Computer model of clonazepam’s effect in thalamic
slice. Neuroreport 8: 3339 –3343, 1997.
Lytton WW, Contreras D, Destexhe A, and Steriade M. Dynamic interactions determine partial thalamic quiescence in a computer network model of spike-and-wave seizures. J Neurophysiol
77: 1679 –1696, 1997.
Lytton WW, Destexhe A, and Sejnowski TJ. Control of slow
oscillations in the thalamocortical neuron: a computer model. Neuroscience 70: 673– 684, 1996.
Magee JC and Carruth M. Dendritic voltage-gated ion channels
regulate the action potential firing mode of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. J Neurophysiol 82: 1895–1901, 1999.
Marcus EM and Watson CW. Bilateral synchronous spike wave
electrographic patterns in the cat: interaction of bilateral cortical
foci in the intact, the bilateral cortical-callosal and adiencephalic
preparations. Arch Neurol 14: 601– 610, 1966.
Marr D. Simple memory: a theory for the archicortex. Philos Trans
R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 262: 23– 81, 1971.
McClelland JL, McNaughton BL, and O’Reilly RC. Why there
are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes and failures of connectionist
models of learning and memory. Psychol Rev 102: 419 – 457, 1995.
McCormick DA. Neurotransmitter actions in the thalamus and
cerebral cortex and their role in neuromodulation of thalamocortical activity. Prog Neurobiol 39: 337–388, 1992.
McCormick DA and Feeser HR. Functional implications of burst
firing and single spike activity in lateral geniculate relay neurons.
Neuroscience 39: 103–113, 1990.
McCormick DA and Hashemiyoon R. Thalamocortical neurons
actively participate in the generation of spike-and-wave seizures in
rodents. Soc Neurosci Abstr 24: 129, 1998.
McCormick DA and Huguenard JR. A model of the electrophysiological properties of thalamocortical relay neurons. J Neurophysiol 68: 1384 –1400, 1992.
McCormick DA and Pape HC. Properties of a hyperpolarizationactivated cation current and its role in rhythmic oscillations in
thalamic relay neurones. J Physiol 431: 291–318, 1990.
McCormick DA and Prince DA. Mechanisms of action of acetylcholine in the guinea-pig cerebral cortex in vitro. J Physiol 375:
169 –194, 1986.
McCormick DA and Wang Z. Serotonin and noradrenaline excite
GABAergic neurones of the guinea-pig and cat nucleus reticularis
thalami. J Physiol 442: 235–255, 1991.
McLachlan RS, Avoli M, and Gloor P. Transition from spindles
to generalized spike and wave discharges in the cat: simultaneous
single-cell recordings in the cortex and thalamus. Exp Neurol 85:
413– 425, 1984.
McMullen TA and Ly N. Model of oscillatory activity in thalamic
neurons: role of voltage and calcium-dependent ionic conductances. Biol Cybernetics 58: 243–259, 1988.
Meeren HK, Pijn JP, Van Luijtelaar EL, Coenen AM, and
Lopes da Silva FH. Cortical focus drives widespread corticothalamic networks during spontaneous absence seizures in rats.
J Neurosci 22: 1480 –1495, 2002.
Minderhoud JM. An anatomical study of the efferent connections
of the thalamic reticular nucleus. Exp Brain Res 112: 435– 446,
1971.
Mons N, Harry A, Dubourg P, Premont RT, Iyengar R, and
Cooper DM. Immunohistochemical localization of adenylyl cyPhysiol Rev • VOL

234.

235.

236.
237.

238.

239.

240.
241.
242.

243.
244.

245.
246.

247.

248.

249.

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

255.

256.

257.

clase in rat brain indicates a highly selective concentration at
synapses. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92: 8473– 8477, 1995.
Morison RS and Bassett DL. Electrical activity of the thalamus
and basal ganglia in decorticate cats. J Neurophysiol 8: 309 –314,
1945.
Moruzzi G. The functional significance of sleep with particular
regard to the brain mechanisms underlining consciousness. In:
Brain and Conscious Experience, edited by Eccles JC. Berlin:
Springer, 1966, p. 345–379.
Muhlethaler M and Serafin M. Thalamic spindles in an isolated
and perfused preparation in vitro. Brain Res 524: 17–21, 1990.
Mulle C, Madariaga A, and Descheˆ nes M. Morphology and
electrophysiological properties of reticularis thalami neurons in
cat: in vivo study of a thalamic pacemaker. J Neurosci 6: 2134 –
2145, 1986.
Munsch T, Budde T, and Pape HC. Voltage-activated intracellular calcium transients in thalamic relay cells and interneurons.
Neuroreport 11: 2411–2418, 1997.
Nadasdy Z, Hirase H, Czurko A, Csicsvari J, and Buzsaki G.
Replay and time compression of recurring spike sequences in the
hippocampus. J Neurosci 19: 9497–9507, 1999.
Niedermeyer E. Primary (idiopathic) generalized epilepsy and
underlying mechanisms. Clin Electroencephalogr 27: 1–21, 1996.
Niedermeyer E and Lopes da Silva F (Editors). Electroencephalography (4th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1998.
Nowycky MC, Fox AP, and Tsien RW. Three types of neuronal
calcium channel with different calcium agonist sensitivity. Nature
316: 440 – 443, 1985.
Nunez PL. Electric Fields of the Brain. The Neurophysics of EEG.
Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press, 1981.
Pape HC. Queer current and pacemaker: the hyperpolarizationactivated cation current in neurons. Annu Rev Physiol 58: 299 –327,
1996.
Partridge LD and Swandulla D. Calcium-activated non-specific
cation channels. Trends Neurosci 11: 69 –72, 1988.
Paulsen O and Heggelund P. The quantal size at retinogeniculate
synapses determined from spontaneous and evoked EPSCs in guinea-pig thalamic slices. J Physiol 480: 505–511, 1994.
Paulsen O and Heggelund P. Quantal properties of spontaneous
EPSCs in neurones of the guinea-pig dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. J Physiol 496: 759 –772, 1996.
Pellegrini A, Musgrave J, and Gloor P. Role of afferent input of
subcortical origin in the genesis of bilaterally synchronous epileptic discharges of feline generalized epilepsy. Exp Neurol 64: 155–
173, 1979.
Perkel DH and Mulloney B. Motor pattern production in reciprocally inhibitory neurons exhibiting postinhibitory rebound. Science 185: 181–183, 1974.
Peters A and Jones EG (Editors). Cerebral Cortex: Cellular
Components of the Cerebral Cortex. New York: Plenum, 1984,
vol. 1.
Pinault D, Leresche N, Charpier S, Deniau JM, Marescaux C,
Vergnes M, and Crunelli V. Intracellular recordings in thalamic
neurones during spontaneous spike and wave discharges in rats
with absence epilepsy. J Physiol 509: 449 – 456, 1998.
Pinault D, Smith Y, and Descheˆ nes M. Dendrodendritic and
axosomatic synapses in the thalamic reticular nucleus of the adult
rat. J Neurosci 17: 3215–3233, 1997.
Pollard CE and Crunelli V. Intrinsic membrane currents in projection cells of the cat and rat lateral geniculate nucleus. Neurosci
Lett 32: S39, 1988.
Pollen DA. Intracellular studies of cortical neurons during thalamic induced wave and spike. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 17: 398 – 404, 1964.
Prevett MC, Duncan JS, Jones T, Fish DR, and Brooks DJ.
Demonstration of thalamic activation during typical absence seizures during H215O and PET. Neurology 45: 1396 –1402, 1995.
Prince DA and Farrell D. “Centrencephalic” spike-wave discharges following parenteral penicillin injection in the cat. Neurology 19: 309 –310, 1969.
Puigcerver A, Van Luijtenaar EJLM, Drinkenburg WHIM, and
Coenen ALM. Effects of the GABAA antagonist CGP-35348 on

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

220.

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

258.

259.

260.

261.

262.

263.

264.
265.

267.

268.

269.
270.

271.

272.
273.

274.
275.
276.

277.

278.
279.
280.
281.

282.
283.

Physiol Rev • VOL

284.

285.

286.

287.

288.

289.

290.

291.

292.
293.

294.

295.
296.
297.
298.

299.

300.

301.

302.

303.

304.

305.
306.

Activity of thalamic reticular neurons during spontaneous genetically determined spike and wave discharges. J Neurosci 22: 2323–
2334, 2002.
Smith GD, Cox CL, Sherman M, and Rinzel J. Fourier analysis
of sinusoidally driven thalamocortical relay neurons and a minimal
integrate-and-fire-or-burst model. J Neurophysiol 83: 588 – 610,
2000.
Smith KA and Fisher RS. The selective GABAB antagonist CGP35348 blocks spike-wave bursts in the cholesterol synthesis rat
absence epilepsy model. Brain Res 729: 147–150, 1996.
Snead OC. Evidence for GABAB-mediated mechanisms in experimental generalized absence seizures. Eur J Pharmacol 213: 343–
349, 1992.
Soderling TR. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II:
role in learning and memory. Mol Cell Biochem 127/128: 93–101,
1993.
Sohal VS and Huguenard JR. Long-range connections synchronize rather than spread intrathalamic oscillations: computational
modeling and in vitro electrophysiology. J Neurophysiol 80: 1736 –
1751, 1998.
Soltesz I and Crunelli V. GABAA and pre- and post-synaptic
GABAB receptor-mediated responses in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Prog Brain Res 90: 151–169, 1992.
Soltesz I, Lightowler S, Leresche N, Jassik-Gerschenfeld D,
Pollard CE, and Crunelli V. Two inward currents and the transformation of low frequency oscillations of rat and cat thalamocortical cells. J Physiol 441: 175–197, 1991.
Spreafico R, de Curtis M, Frassoni C, and Avanzini G. Electrophysiological characteristics of morphologically identified reticular thalamic neurons from rat slices. Neuroscience 27: 629 – 638,
1988.
Squire LR and Zola-Morgan S. The medial temporal lobe memory system. Science 253: 1380 –1386, 1991.
Staak R and Pape HC. Contribution of GABA(A) and GABA(B)
receptors to thalamic neuronal activity during spontaneous absence seizures in rats. J Neurosci 21: 1378 –1384, 2001.
Steriade M. Interneuronal epileptic discharges related to spikeand-wave cortical seizures in behaving monkeys. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 37: 247–263, 1974.
Steriade M. Cortical long-axoned cells and putative interneurons
during the sleep-waking cycle. Behav Brain Sci 3: 465–514, 1978.
Steriade M. To burst, or rather, not to burst. Nat Neurosci 4: 671,
2001.
Steriade M. The Intact and Sliced Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT,
2001.
Steriade M and Amzica F. Intracortical and corticothalamic coherency of fast spontaneous oscillations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
93: 2533–2538, 1996.
Steriade M and Amzica F. Intracellular study of excitability in the
seizure-prone neocortex in vivo. J Neurophysiol 82: 3108 –3122,
1999.
Steriade M, Amzica F, and Contreras D. Synchronization of fast
(30 – 40 Hz) spontaneous cortical rhythms during brain arousal.
J Neurosci 16: 392– 417, 1996.
Steriade M and Contreras D. Relations between cortical and
thalamic cellular events during transition from sleep patterns to
paroxysmal activity. J Neurosci 15: 623– 642, 1995.
Steriade M and Contreras D. Spike-wave complexes and fast
components of cortically generated seizures. I. Role of neocortex
and thalamus. J Neurophysiol 80: 1439 –1455, 1998.
Steriade M, Contreras D, Curro´ Dossi R, and Nunez A. The
slow (Ͻ1 Hz) oscillation in reticular thalamus and thalamocortical
neurons. Scenario of sleep rhythms generation in interacting thalamic and neocortical networks. J Neurosci 13: 3284 –3299, 1993.
Steriade M, Curro Dossi R, and Contreras D. Electrophysiological properties of intralaminar thalamocortical cells discharging
rhythmic (ϳ40 Hz) spike-bursts at ϳ1000 Hz during waking and
rapid eye movement sleep. Neuroscience 56: 1–9, 1993.
Steriade M and Descheˆ nes M. The thalamus as a neuronal oscillator. Brain Res Rev 8: 1– 63, 1984.
Steriade M, Descheˆ nes M, Domich L, and Mulle C. Abolition of
spindle oscillations in thalamic neurons disconnected from nucleus
reticularis thalami. J Neurophysiol 54: 1473–1497, 1985.

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

266.

sleep-wake states, behaviour and spike-wave discharges in old rats.
Brain Res Bull 40: 157–162, 1996.
Ralston B and Ajmone-Marsan C. Thalamic control of certain
normal and abnormal cortical rhythms. EEG Clin Neurophysiol 8:
559 –582, 1956.
Renaud-Le Masson S, Le Masson G, Marder E, and Abbott LF.
Hybrid circuits of interacting computer model and biological neurons. In: Advanced in Neural Information Processing Systems,
edited by Hanson SJ, Cowan JD, and Giles GL. San Mateo, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann, 1993, vol. 5, p. 813– 819.
Renshaw B, Forbes A, and Morison BR. Activity of isocortex
and hippocampus: electrical studies with microelectrodes. J Neurophysiol 3: 74 –105, 1940.
Robinson HP and Kawai N. Injection of digitally synthesized
synaptic conductance transients to measure the integrative properties of neurons. J Neurosci Methods 49: 157–165, 1993.
Rose RM and Hindmarsh JL. The assembly of ionic currents in a
thalamic neuron. I. The three-dimensional model. Proc R Soc Lond
B Biol Sci 237: 267–288, 1989.
Roy JP, Clercq M, Steriade M, and Descheˆ nes M. Electrophysiology of neurons in lateral thalamic nuclei in cat: mechanisms of
long-lasting hyperpolarizations. J Neurophysiol 51: 1220 –1235,
1984.
Sakmann B and Neher E (Editors). Single-Channel Recording
(2nd ed.). New York: Plenum, 1995.
Sanchez-Vives MV, Bal T, and McCormick DA. Inhibitory interactions between perigeniculate GABAergic neurons. J Neurosci 17:
8894 – 8908, 1997.
Sanchez-Vives MV and McCormick DA. Functional properties of
perigeniculate inhibition of dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus
thalamocortical neurons in vitro. J Neurosci 17: 8880 – 8893, 1997.
Sanchez-Vives MV and McCormick DA. Cellular and network
mechanisms of rhythmic recurrent activity in neocortex. Nature
Neurosci 3: 1027–1034, 2000.
Sanderson KJ. The projection of the visual field to the lateral
geniculate and medial interlaminar nuclei in the cat. J Comp Neurol
143: 101–108, 1971.
Scheibel ME and Scheibel AB. The organization of the nucleus
reticularis thalami: a Golgi study. Brain Res 1: 43– 62, 1966.
Scheibel ME and Scheibel AB. Patterns of organization in specific and nonspecific thalamic fields. In: The Thalamus, edited by
Purpura DP and Yahr M. New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1966, p.
13– 46.
Scheibel ME and Scheibel AB. Structural organization of nonspecific thalamic nuclei and their projection toward cortex. Brain
Res 6: 60 –94, 1967.
Schlag J and Waszak M. Electrophysiological properties of units
of the thalamic reticular complex. Exp Neurol 32: 79 –97, 1971.
Seidenbecher T, Staak R, and Pape HC. Relations between
cortical and thalamic cellular activities during absence seizures in
rats. Eur J Neurosci 10: 1103–1112, 1998.
Selverston AI (Editor). Model Neural Networks and Behavior.
New York: Plenum, 1985.
Sharp AA, Abbott LF, and Marder E. Artificial electrical synapses in oscillatory networks. J Neurophysiol 67: 1691–1694, 1992.
Sharp AA, O’Neil MB, Abbott LF, and Marder E. The dynamic
clamp: artificial conductances in biological neurons. Trends Neurosci 16: 389 –394, 1993.
Sharp AA, O’Neil MB, Abbott LF, and Marder E. Dynamic
clamp: computer-generated conductances in real neurons. J Neurophysiol 69: 992–995, 1993.
Sherman SM. A wake-up call from the thalamus. Nat Neurosci 4:
344 –346, 2001.
Sherman SM and Guillery RW. Exploring the Thalamus. New
York: Academic, 2001.
Shu Y and McCormick DA. Inhibitory interactions between ferret
thalamic reticular neurons. J Neurophysiol 87: 2571–2576, 2002.
Siapas AG and Wilson MA. Coordinated interactions between
hippocampal ripples and cortical spindles during slow-wave sleep.
Neuron 21: 1123–1128, 1998.
Siegel JM. The REM sleep-memory consolidation hypothesis. Science 294: 1058 –1063, 2001.
Slaght SJ, Leresche N, Deniau JM, Crunelli V, and Charpier S.

1451

1452

A. DESTEXHE AND T. J. SEJNOWSKI

Physiol Rev • VOL

332.
333.

334.

335.

336.

337.
338.

339.

340.

341.

342.

343.
344.

345.

346.

347.

348.
349.

350.

351.

352.

353.

354.

355.

riade M. Origin of slow cortical oscillations in deafferented cortical slabs. Cereb Cortex 10: 1185–1199, 2000.
Toth T and Crunelli V. Computer simulations of the pacemaker
oscillations of thalamocortical cells. Neuroreport 3: 65– 68, 1992.
Tsakiridou E, Bertollini L, de Curtis M, Avanzini G, and Pape
HC. Selective increase in T-type calcium conductance of reticular
thalamic neurons in a rat model of absence epilepsy. J Neurosci 15:
3110 –3117, 1995.
Turner JP and Salt TE. Characterization of sensory and corticothalamic excitatory inputs to rat thalamocortical neurones in vitro.
J Physiol 510: 829 – 843, 1998.
Uchimura N, Cherubini E, and North RA. Cation current activated by hyperpolarization in a subset of rat nucleus accumbens
neurons. J Neurophysiol 64: 1847–1850, 1990.
Ulrich D and Huguenard JR. GABAB receptor-mediated responses in GABAergic projection neurones of rat nucleus reticularis thalami in vitro. J Physiol 493: 845– 854, 1996.
Ulrich D and Huguenard JR. Nucleus-specific chloride homeostasis in the thalamus. J Neurosci 17: 2348 –2354, 1997.
Ulrich D and Huguenard JR. GABAA-receptor-mediated rebound
burst firing and burst shunting in thalamus. J Neurophysiol 78:
1748 –1751, 1997.
VanDongen AMJ, Codina J, Olate J, Mattera R, Joho R, Birnbaumer L, and Brown AM. Newly identified brain potassium
channels gated by the guanine nucleotide binding protein Go. Science 242: 1433–1437, 1988.
Van Ginneken ACG and Giles W. Voltage-clamp measurements
of the hyperpolarization-activated inward current If in single cells
from rabbit sino-atrial node. J Physiol 434: 57– 83, 1991.
Vergnes M and Marescaux C. Cortical and thalamic lesions in
rats with genetic absence epilepsy. J Neural Transm 35 Suppl:
71– 83, 1992.
Vergnes M, Marescaux C, Micheletti G, Depaulis A, Rumbach
L, and Warter JM. Enhancement of spike and wave discharges by
GABA mimetic drugs in rats with spontaneous petit-mal-like epilepsy. Neurosci Lett 44: 91–94, 1984.
Vertes RP and Eastman KE. The case against memory consolidation in REM sleep. Behav Brain Sci 23: 867– 876, 2000.
Verzeano M. Pacemakers, synchronization, and epilepsy. In: Synchronization of EEG Activity in Epilepsies, edited by Petsche H
and Brazier MAB. Berlin: Springer, 1972, p. 154 –158.
Verzeano M and Negishi K. Neuronal activity in cortical and
thalamic networks. A study with multiple microelectrodes. J Gen
Physiol 43: 177–195, 1960.
Von Krosigk M, Bal T, and McCormick DA. Cellular mechanisms of a synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science 261:
361–364, 1993.
Waigner BJ, Degennaro M, Santoro B, Seigelbaum SA, and
Tibbs GR. Molecular mechanism of cAMP modulation of HCN
pacemaker channels. Nature 411: 805– 810, 2001.
Wallenstein GV. A model of the electrophysiological properties of
nucleus reticularis thalami neurons. Biophys J 66: 978 –988, 1994.
Wallenstein GV. The role of thalamic IGABA(B) in generating spikewave discharges during petit mal seizures. Neuroreport 5: 1409 –
1412, 1994.
Wallenstein GV. Adenosinic modulation of 7–14 Hz spindle
rhythms in interconnected thalamic relay and nucleus reticularis
neurons. Neuroscience 73: 93–98, 1996.
Warren RA, Agmon A, and Jones EG. Oscillatory synaptic interactions between ventroposterior and reticular neurons in mouse
thalamus in vitro. J Neurophysiol 72: 1993–2003, 1994.
Wang XJ. Multiple dynamical modes of thalamic relay neurons:
rhythmic bursting and intermittent phase-locking. Neuroscience 59:
21–31, 1994.
Wang XJ, Golomb D, and Rinzel J. Emergent spindle oscillations
and intermittent burst firing in a thalamic model: specific neuronal
mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92: 5577–5581, 1995.
Wang XJ and Rinzel J. Alternating and synchronous rhythms in
reciprocally inhibitory model neurons. Neural Computat 4: 84 –97,
1992.
Wang XJ and Rinzel J. Spindle rhythmicity in the reticularis
thalami nucleus: synchronization among inhibitory neurons. Neuroscience 53: 899 –904, 1993.

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

307. Steriade M, Domich L, and Oakson G. Reticularis thalami neurons revisited: activity changes during shifts in states of vigilance.
J Neurosci 6: 68 – 81, 1986.
308. Steriade M, Domich L, Oakson G, and Descheˆ nes M. The
deafferented reticular thalamic nucleus generates spindle rhythmicity. J Neurophysiol 57: 260 –273, 1987.
309. Steriade M, Jones EG, and Llina´ s RR. Thalamic Oscillations
and Signalling. New York: Wiley, 1990.
310. Steriade M and Llina´ s RR. The functional states of the thalamus
and the associated neuronal interplay. Physiol Rev 68: 649 –742,
1988.
311. Steriade M and McCarley RW. Brainstem Control of Wakefulness and Sleep. New York: Plenum, 1990.
312. Steriade M, McCormick DA, and Sejnowski TJ. Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused brain. Science 262:
679 – 685, 1993.
313. Steriade M, Timofeev I, and Grenier F. Inhibitory components
of cortical spike-wave seizures in vivo. Soc Neurosci Abstr 24: 2143,
1998.
314. Steriade M, Timofeev I, and Grenier F. Natural waking and
sleep states: a view from inside neocortical neurons. J Neurophysiol 85: 1969 –1985, 2001.
315. Steriade M, Wyzinski P, and Apostol V. Corticofugal projections
governing rhythmic thalamic activity. In: Corticothalamic Projections and Sensorimotor Activities, edited by Frigyesi TL, Rinvik E,
and Yahr MD. New York: Raven, 1972, p. 221–272.
316. Stickgold R, Hobson JA, Fosse R, and Fosse M. Sleep, learning,
and dreams: off-line memory reprocessing. Science 294: 1052–1057,
2001.
317. Stickgold R, Whidbee D, Schirmer B, Patel V, and Hobson JA.
Visual discrimination task improvement: a multi-step process occurring during sleep. J Cogn Neurosci 12: 246 –254, 2000.
318. Sutherland GR and McNaughton B. Memory trace reactivation
in hippocampal and neocortical neuronal ensembles. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 10: 180 –186, 2000.
319. Suzuki S and Rogawski MA. T-type calcium channels mediate the
transition between tonic and phasic firing in thalamic neurons.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86: 7228 –7232, 1989.
320. Svoboda K, Denk W, Kleinfeld D, and Tank DW. In vivo dendritic calcium dynamics in neocortical pyramidal neurons. Nature
385: 161–165, 1997.
321. Talley EM, Cribbs LL, Lee JH, Daud A, Perez-Reyes E, and
Bayliss DA. Differential distribution of three members of a gene
family encoding low-voltage activated (T-type) calcium channels.
J Neurosci 19: 1895–1911, 1999.
322. Tancredi V, Biagini G, D’Antuono M, Louvel J, Pumain R, and
Avoli M. Spindle-like thalamocortical synchronization in a rat
brain slice preparation. J Neurophysiol 84: 1093–1097, 2000.
323. Terman D, Bose A, and Koppell N. Functional reorganization in
thalamocortical networks: transition between spindling and delta
sleep rhythms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93: 15417–15422, 1996.
324. Thomas E and Grisar T. Increased synchrony with increase of a
low-threshold calcium conductance in a model thalamic network: a
phase-shift mechanism. Neural Comput 12: 1553–1571, 2000.
325. Thomas E and Lytton WW. Computer model of antiepileptic
effects mediated by alterations in GABA(A)-mediated inhibition.
Neuroreport 9: 691– 696, 1998.
326. Thomas E and Wyatt RE. A computational model of spindle
oscillations. Math Comput Simul 40: 35– 69, 1995.
327. Thomson AM and Destexhe A. Dual intracellular recordings and
computational models of slow IPSPs in rat neocortical and hippocampal slices. Neuroscience 92: 1193–1215, 1999.
328. Thomson AM and West DC. Local-circuit excitatory and inhibitory connections in slices of the rat thalamus (Abstract). J Physiol
438: 113P, 1991.
329. Timofeev I, Bazhenov M, Sejnowski TJ, and Steriade M. Cortical hyperpolarization-activated depolarizing current takes part in
the generation of focal paroxysmal activities. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 99: 9533–9537, 2002.
330. Timofeev I, Contreras D, and Steriade M. Synaptic responsiveness of cortical and thalamic neurones during various phases of
slow sleep oscillation in cat. J Physiol 494: 265–278, 1996.
331. Timofeev I, Grenier F, Bazhenov M, Sejnowski TJ, and Ste-

THALAMOCORTICAL SLOW-WAVE OSCILLATIONS

Physiol Rev • VOL

366. Yamada M, Jahangir A, Hosoya Y, Inanobe A, Katada T, and
Kurachi Y. GK* and brain G beta gamma activate muscarinic Kϩ
channel through the same mechanism. J Biol Chem 268: 24551–
24554, 1993.
367. Yarom Y. Rhythmogenesis in a hybrid system-interconnecting an
olivary neuron to an analog network of coupled oscillators. Neuroscience 44: 263–275, 1991.
368. Yen CT, Conley M, Hendry SH, and Jones EG. The morphology
of physiologically identified GABAergic neurons in the somatic
sensory part of the thalamic reticular nucleus in the cat. J Neurosci
5: 2254 –2268, 1985.
369. Yingling CD and Skinner JE. Gating of thalamic input to the
cerebral cortex by nucleus reticularis thalami. Prog Clin Neurophysiol 1: 70 –96, 1977.
370. Yuste R and Tank DW. Dendritic integration in mammalian neurons, a century after Cajal. Neuron 16: 701–716, 1996.
371. Zhan XJ, Cox CL, and Sherman SM. Dendritic depolarization
efficiently attenuates low-threshold calcium spikes in thalamic relay cells. J Neurosci 15: 3909 –3914, 2000.
372. Zhang SJ, Huguenard JR, and Prince DA. GABAA receptormediated ClϪ currents in rat thalamic reticular and relay neurons.
J Neurophysiol 78: 2280 –2286, 1997.
373. Zhou Q, Godwin DW, O’Malley DM, and Adams PR. Visualisation of calcium influx through channels that shape the burst and
tonic firing modes of thalamic relay cells. J Neurophysiol 77:
2816 –2825, 1997.
374. Zola-Morgan SM and Squire LR. The primate hippocampal formation: evidence for a time-limited role in memory storage. Science
250: 288 –290, 1990.

83 • OCTOBER 2003 •

www.prv.org

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

356. Wang XJ, Rinzel J, and Rogawski MA. A model of the T-type
calcium current and the low-threshold spike in thalamic neurons.
J Neurophysiol 66: 839 – 850, 1991.
357. Weyand TG, Boudreaux M, and Guido W. Burst and tonic response modes in thalamic neurons during sleep and wakefulness.
J Neurophysiol 85: 1107–1118, 2001.
358. White EL and Hersch SM. A quantitative study of thalamocortical
and other synapses involving the apical dendrites of corticothalamic cells in mouse SmI cortex. J Neurocytol 11: 137–157, 1982.
359. Widen K and Ajmone Marsan C. Effects of corticopetal and
corticofugal impulses upon single elements of the dorsolateral
geniculate nucleus. Exp Neurol 2: 468 –502, 1960.
360. Williams D. A study of thalamic and cortical rhythms in Petit Mal.
Brain 76: 50 – 69, 1953.
361. Williams SR and Stuart GJ. Action potential backpropagation
and somato-dendritic distributions of ion channels in thalamocortical neurons. J Neurosci 20: 1307–1317, 2000.
362. Wilson MA and McNaughton BL. Reactivation of hippocampal
ensemble memories during sleep. Science 265: 676 – 679, 1994.
363. Worgotter F, Suder K, Zhao Y, Kerscher N, Eysel UT, and
Funke K. State-dependent receptive-field restructuring in the visual cortex. Nature 396: 165–168, 1998.
364. Wright JJ, Robinson PA, Rennie CJ, Gordon E, Bourke PD,
Chapman CL, Hawthorn N, Lees GJ, and Alexander D. Toward
an integrated continuum model of cerebral dynamics: the cerebral
rhythms, synchronous oscillation and cortical stability. Biosystems
63: 71– 88, 2001.
365. Wu GY and Cline HT. Stabilization of dendritic arbor structure in
vivo by CaMKII. Science 279: 222–226, 1998.

1453

Interactions Between Membrane Conductances
Underlying Thalamocortical Slow-Wave Oscillations
A. DESTEXHE and T. J. SEJNOWSKI

Physiol Rev 83:1401-1453, 2003. doi:10.1152/physrev.00012.2003
You might find this additional info useful...
This article cites 347 articles, 179 of which can be accessed free at:
/content/83/4/1401.full.html#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 30 other HighWire hosted articles, the first 5 are:
The interplay of seven subthreshold conductances controls the resting membrane
potential and the oscillatory behavior of thalamocortical neurons
Yimy Amarillo, Edward Zagha, German Mato, Bernardo Rudy and Marcela S. Nadal
J Neurophysiol, July 15, 2014; 112 (2): 393-410.
[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]

About Sleep's Role in Memory
Björn Rasch and Jan Born
Physiol Rev, April , 2013; 93 (2): 681-766.
[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
Midline thalamic paraventricular nucleus neurons display diurnal variation in resting
membrane potentials, conductances, and firing patterns in vitro
Miloslav Kolaj, Li Zhang, Oline K. Rønnekleiv and Leo P. Renaud
J Neurophysiol, April 1, 2012; 107 (7): 1835-1844.
[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
Updated information and services including high resolution figures, can be found at:
/content/83/4/1401.full.html
Additional material and information about Physiological Reviews can be found at:
http://www.the-aps.org/publications/prv

This information is current as of November 4, 2014.

Physiological Reviews provides state of the art coverage of timely issues in the physiological and biomedical sciences. It is
published quarterly in January, April, July, and October by the American Physiological Society, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda
MD 20814-3991. Copyright © 2003 by the American Physiological Society. ISSN: 0031-9333, ESSN: 1522-1210. Visit our
website at http://www.the-aps.org/.

Downloaded from on November 4, 2014

Non-Hebbian Long-Term Potentiation of Inhibitory Synapses in the Thalamus
Andrea Rahel Sieber, Rogier Min and Thomas Nevian
J. Neurosci., October 2, 2013; 33 (40): 15675-15685.
[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]

