Circuitry, Architecture, and
Functional Dynamics of Visual
Cortex

The Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021-6399

Cortical Circuitry and Projection Patterns
The cortical circuit can be divided into its excitatory
components, generated by pyramidal and spiny stellate cells, and its inhibitory components, formed by
smooth stellate cells. Classically, much of the cortical
circuit had been delineated using the Golgi silver
impregnation technique (Ramon y Cajal, 1911;
O'Leary, 1941; Lorente de No, 1944; Lund, 1973; Lund
and Boothe, 1975). We used a different approach,
involving intracellular recording and dye injection,
for the several advantages it offers: it allows one to
relate the functional properties of cells to their dendritic morphology and axonal projection pattern, and
it reveals more about the extent of axonal connections
than the Golgi technique (Gilbert and Wiesel, 1979,
1983). The excitatory cells form a series of connections running across the cortical layers. The set of
connections in cat primary visual cortex is summarized in Figure 1. Input from the lateral geniculate
nucleus (LGN) arborizes within layer 4 and the upper
part of layer 6. Layer 4 spiny stellate cells project up
to the superficial layers of cortex, superficial layer
pyramidal cells project down to layer 5, layer 5 projects to layer 6, and layer 6 cells project back up to
layer 4, closing a loop of intrinsic excitatory connections. In addition to these spiny neurons, there is a
population of smooth stellate cells, comprising approximately 20% of cortical neurons, that mediate inhibition within the cortex. At each stage in the cortical
circuit the spiny cells are tapped for output to other
areas, superficial layer cells projecting to other cortical areas (Fig. 2), layer 5 cells projecting to the
superior colliculus, and layer 6 cells projecting to the
LGN (Gilbert and Kelly, 1975).
The functional properties of cells in any cortical
layer are well suited to the functions of the structures
to which they project, and they reflect the characteristics of the inputs to the layer in which they reside
(Gilbert, 1977). Layer 4 cells, as well as cells in the
superficial part of layer 6, receive input from the LGN,
and have simple receptive field properties, supporting
the idea that the simple cell represents the first stage
in visual cortical processing (Hubel and Wiesel, 1962).
Cells in layer 2/3 have complex receptive fields, with
small diameters, that are end-inhibited, which is appropriate for the higher resolution and analysis of
form that higher cortical areas mediate. Cells in layer
5 have larger receptive fields, tend to be directionally
selective, and are sensitive to movement of small ob-

Cerebral Cortex Sep/Oct 1993:3:373-386; 1047-3211/93/14.00

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

A fundamental understanding of the mechanisms of cortical processing requires an examination of the relationships of cortical circuitry, functional architecture,
and receptive field properties. Ultimately, this kind of
analysis can be utilized to explore the neurobiological
basis of psychophysics and perception. At the outset
our studies were intended to account for the then known
receptive field properties of cortical cells in terms of
their underlying circuitry, but surprisingly a good part
of the cortical circuit appeared to be in violation of the
principles of cortical architecture, and this led us to
explore the possibility of new, more complex properties
of cortical cells. It has become increasingly possible to
relate the responsive specificity of cortical cells, and
the circuitry underlying this specificity, to the perceptual
capabilities of the visual system by performing analogous experiments on single cells and in human psychophysics.

Charles D. Gilbert

jects within the receptive field. Since these cells project to the superior colliculus, which helps direct the
movement of the eyes to track moving objects, they
are likely to provide the colliculus with information
about the direction of object movement. Cells in layer
6 form a major feedback projection to the LGN, but
the role of this projection remains largely unknown.
They also project to layer 4, and play an important
role in the generation of the property of end-inhibition.
Functional Rotas of Intertaminar Connections
One can account for some of the functional properties
of cortical cells by the connections between layers.
By comparing the receptive field properties of intracellularly injected neurons with those in the layers
to which they project, we developed models of how
particular connections would contribute specific receptive field properties.
An important interlaminar connection is that originating in layer 6 and synapsing with neurons in layer
4 (Fig. 3). Cells in layer 4 show selectivity for the
length of a line stimulus, having inhibitoryflanksalong
the orientation axis of the receptive field, a property
referred to as end-inhibition. In addition to orientation selectivity, this property may play an important
role in the analysis of form, giving cells a sensitivity
to local curvature. Cells with end-inhibited receptive
fields respond better to curved lines than to long,

straight lines (Fig. 4, left). In contrast to this property,
layer 6 cells show the opposite behavior: a short bar
produces little or no response, and as the bar is
lengthened, the response improves progressively up
to lengths of 10-15°. The size of the receptive fields
of layer 4 cells, including their inhibitory flanks, is
roughly comparable to the receptive fields of layer 6
cells. It would be plausible, therefore, that the inhibition in layer 4 is produced by the projection from
layer 6 to layer 4 by means of an inhibitory neuron
(Fig. 4, middle). This idea was supported by the finding that the population of neurons targeted by layer
6 cells are preponderantly smooth stellate cells
(McGuire et al., 1984). When layer 6 cells are inactivated by local injection of GABA, the cells in layer
4 overlying the injection site lose the property of endinhibition (Fig. 4, right; Bolz and Gilbert, 1986). The
direct projection from layer 6 to layer 4 is therefore
the most likely source of end-inhibition. Since, however, layer 6 cells project both to layer 4 and down
to the LGN, some of their effects might be mediated
by the corticothalamic feedback. Though cortical ablation reduces some of the surround inhibition seen
in neurons in the LGN (Murphy and Sillito, 1987),
local injection of GABA in layer 6, while eliminating
end-inhibition in cortex, has little effect on LGN surrounds (Bolz et al., 1989). This supports the idea that
cortical end-inhibition is mediated by the direct pathway from layer 6 to layer 4.

Figore 2 . Concocortical connections, viewed by retrograde transpon of eitraceltutariy injected HRP. t. Fdkwmg a focal HRP mjectnn ui area 19. the retrogradely labeled cells
in area 17 are found in die superficial cortical layers, and are distributed widely, indicating h«jMy eowagsnt comectmns. The crib are grouped In clutters, reflecting columnar
spEofttity of the connections, b. Camera lunda reconstruction of the leuogiadely labeled cells in the nght cluster i i a which afi had pyrarndaj morphology, c The labeled cells
(&tot| represent mighty 20% of the total populaitan (G&en and KefJy. 1975. reprinted from Gilbert and Wiesel. 1981). Scale bars, 100 /im.

374 Dynamics of Visual Cortex • Gilbert

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

Figure 1 . Schematic diagram of the mtraconical corrections of the cat's striate cortu. determined by nraraflutm HRP injections IGiben and Wisse), 1979). The spiny stefete
and pyrsrndal cells are responsUe for excitatory connections, and their mtrsconical and efferent corrections are suj'nmamsd in the block dogram Aabw. Smooth steflate celts,
several types of which are shown at iflper ngtn. mediate inhibitory interactions in the conu (Gilbert and Wiesel, 1983)

*-*. * . - . - •

-••*T.-.

v v ,

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

2*3

4ab

Cerebral Cortex Sep/Oct 1993, V 3 N 5 375

Long-range Horizontal Connections
In any vertical column, cells have overlapping receptive fields with similar orientation specificity and eye
preference (Hubel and Wiesel, 1962). From considerations of functional architecture, it made a lot of
sense that there would by a systematic series of connections between layers, relating cells with similar
functional properties. It was therefore quite suprising
to find extensive horizontal connections traveling parallel to the cortical surface, relating sites representing
disparate locations in the visual field. These are the
axon collaterals of conical pyramidal cells (Gilbert
and Wiesel, 1979, 1983, 1989; Rockland and Lund,
1982, 1983; Martin and Whitteridge, 1984). An example of one of these cells, with its characteristic
horizontally projecting clustered collateral arbor, is
shown in Figure 5. These connections allow the target
J78 Dynamics of Visual Cortex • Gilbert

cells to integrate information from a wide area of cortex, and as a consequence of the topographical architecture of cortex, from a large part of the visual
field, including loci outside their receptive fields.
Taking together the receptive field area and the scatter
in receptive field position, the receptive fields of all
the cells in the column will cover a tiny fraction of
the visual field. A rough rule of thumb governing
topographic order in this area is that there is no overlap in the receptive fields of cells separated by a distance of 1.5 mm, a distance corresponding to two
complete cycles of orientation columns, or two "hypercolumns" (Hubel and Wiesel, 1974). Thus, horizontal connections spanning 6-7 mm allow communication between cells with widely separated
receptive fields. This represent puzzling evidence for
cells' ability to integrate information over a larger part

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

figure 3 . Layer G pyramidal cell projecting to layer 4. The apcal dendnte ramifies withm layer 4. and the axon coflateratj are distributed widely within layer 4. The cefl had s
simple receptive field, as is characteristic of uppsr layer G cells, located at 7° eccerancny. 4° in length and 1.5* in width, vertairy oriented and directional for leftward movement
Scale bar, 100 Mm.

11

» +

+

layer 4

layer 6

short bar

long bar

of visual space than that covered by their receptive
fields, and calls into question the very definition of
receptive field. The explanation for this seeming contradiction between cortical topography and receptive
field structure is that the definition of the receptive
field is stimulus dependent, and that a cell's response
can be modulated by stimuli lying outside the classical receptive field. Put another way, a cell's response
to a complex visual stimulus cannot be fully predicted
from its response to a simple stimulus, such as a single
short line segment.
Though the horizontal connections are very widespread, they are quite specific in terms of the functional properties of the target cells. Rather than contacting all cells within a certain radius, the axon
collaterals of the horizontally projecting cells are distributed in discrete clusters. The clustering implied
a possible relationship to the functional architecture
of the cortex: the tendency of cells with similar functional properties to be grouped into columns of similar functional specificity. In the primary visual cortex,
cells with common orientation specificity and ocular
dominance are distributed in this fashion. Several lines
of evidence show that the clustering of the horizontal
axon collaterals allows them to mediate communication between columns of similar orientation preference. The spacing between clusters is roughly the
same distance as that required to run though a full
cycle of orientation columns (or one hypercolumn
for orientation, which is about 750 fim wide). A physiological technique, known as cross-correlation analysis, demonstrated the functional relationship of cells
communicating via the horizontal connections. A
cross-correlation is a histogram of differences in the
spike times for a pair of cells. Cells that are connected,
or that share a common input, will show a peak in
this histogram at a particular delay. Looking across a
population of cells, cross-correlation analysis shows
that cells in columns of similar functional specificity
showed correlated firing, even when separated by dis-

tances as great as 2 mm (Ts'o et al., 1986; Ts'o and
Gilbert, 1988).
An anatomical technique, combining retrograde
tracing with 2-deoxyglucose autoradiography, confirmed the functional specificity of the horizontal connections. Injecting a retrograde tracer, such as rhodamine-filled latex microspheres, reveals the
distribution of cells projecting to the injection site.
After such an injection, cells are labeled across 8 mm
of cortex, which represents an area roughly an order
of magnitude larger than the receptive fields of the
recipient cells. Within the labeled area the cells are
distributed in discrete clusters, reminiscent of the
pattern of axon collaterals seen in intracellular injections. When the retrograde tracing technique is combined with the 2-deoxyglucose technique, one can
compare the distribution of the labeled cells with the
distribution of orientation columns. These experiments showed that the horizontal connections run
between columns of similar orientation specificity
(Gilbert and Wiesel, 1989).
The functional nature of the horizontal connections depends on a complex set of interactions with
their target neurons. Since the cells of origin are pyramidal and the principle targets are other pyramidal
cells, one might expect the net effect of the horizontal
connections within the overall circuit to be excitatory.
Although inhibitory interneurons constitute only 20%
of the targets (McGuire et al., 1991), the inhibitory
component of the horizontally evoked synaptic potentials could be larger than this proportion might
indicate. A number of factors, such as the relative
excitability and the density of local collaterals of inhibitory and excitatory cells, could increase the influence of one population over another. In fact, as observed in an in vitro cortical slice preparation, the
balance between excitation and inhibition generated
by activating the horizontal connections varies widely, from cell to cell and also according to the level of
recruitment of the horizontal inputs (Hirsch and Gil-

Cerebral Cortex Sep/Oct 1993, V 3 N 5 377

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

Figure 4 . Schematic diagrams of the functional role of end-inhibition {left) and ths mechanism for its generation [right), Nnvend-irtibried celts do not respond differentially to
start lines, long straight lines, or curved lines. Endnrtiibited cells respond wefl to short One segments and poorly to long, straight lines. Curved lines with the appropriate radius
of curvature, however, can be effective stimuli, smce, as shown here, the part of the curve passim through the receptive field center a of ths optima) orientation for the excitatory
part of the field but is at an ineffective orientation for the mrttntory flanks, leaving the ceB wnh a net excitation. Ths property of end-nhiutian can be generated by die long
receptive fields of layer 6 cells, which, by comecting rhibrtory irtemeurons in layer 4, can contribute ths end-inhibitory Hanks to layer 4 simple ceSs. TTBS circuit would lead to
a reciprocal behavior in the response of the layer 6 and layer 4 cells to short and long bars, as shown (Gilbert and Wiesd, 1979: Bob and Gilbert. 1386).

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016
Rgore 6. Example of a horizontally projecting pyramdal cell in macaque striate cartel. The cell is e layer 3 pyramidal cell whose axon extended for more than 4 mm parallel to the cortical surface. The dendme is seen as the thicker, darter lines in the center,
and is studded with dendritic spines. The axon gives off several clusters of cototerals within the superficial layers, as wed as projecting out of the immediate conical area (adapted from McGuire et al., 1991).

The picture that emerges is a sequence of convergent pathways mediating integration over progressively larger parts of visual space. Even in primary
visual cortex, however, this convergence enables cells'
stimulus specificities to be influenced by the context
within which a local feature is presented.
Contextual Influences on Receptive Field Properties
Given the picture of the horizontal plexus, its distribution, relationship to functional architecture, and
synaptic physiology, one is left with the question of
functional role in influencing receptive field properties and the perceptual consequences of these influences. An increasing body of evidence now shows
that the size and orientation specificity of receptive
fields can be changed by context, the presence of
contours or textures outside the receptive field. These
changes can be induced in several ways. The concurrent presence of the surrounding contours can alter the functional specificity (or "filter characteristics") of a cell, indicating a differential response
between simple and complex stimuli. Even more surprisingly, stimulation in the receptive field surround
can induce lasting changes in the responsiveness of
the cell to the original simple stimulus, even after the
surrounding pattern is removed. These effects may be
related to observations of visual psychophysics, which
have long established that the perceived attributes of
a local feature can be influenced by the context in
which that feature is presented.
Our first observation in this regard was made in
the domain of orientation. When a line is presented
within the receptive field in isolation, one can determine the orientation specificity of the cell by measuring its response to lines of different orientations,
and deriving an orientation tuning curve. This tuning

curve can be altered when lines are presented in the
surround, and the nature of the influence depends on
the relationship between the orientation of the surround lines and the optimum orientation of the cell.
With certain surround orientations the tuning curve
may be either inhibited or potentiated, and with others one sees other effects including shifts in optimum
orientation and changes in the bandwidth of the tuning curve. Some of the changes can be quantitatively
compared to measurements of shifts in perceived orientation induced by context, a phenomenon known
as the tilt illusion (Gibson and Radner, 1937;Westheimer, 1990). To make such a comparison one has to
make a population model in which the estimate of
orientation is based on the relative firing levels of a
set of cells, each cell tuned to a different orientation.
One such model makes a vector representation of the
cells: each cell is represented by a vector, pointing
in the direction of its optimum orientation and whose
length represents its level of firing. Since the cells
within the ensemble have overlapping tuning curves,
any given stimulus will activate many cells within the
ensemble, and the estimate of orientation can be derived as the vector sum of the entire ensemble. Using
such a model, we found that several of the observed
effects of contextual lines, including iso-orientation
inhibition, shifts in the tuning curves toward the orientation of the surrounding lines, and changes in the
bandwidth of orientation tuning could all account for
the perceptual changes (Gilbert and Wiesel, 1990).
Further experiments are required to ascertain which
of these changes most consistently account for the
psychophysical measurements.
A second example of the context dependency of
receptive field properties is in the domain of receptive
field size. Not only can receptive field properties be
modulated by the presence of contours in the area
surrounding the receptive field, but the surround influences can alter receptive field structure over time.
When an area several times the diameter of the receptive field is occluded, and the surrounding area is
stimulated with lines or random dots, the receptive
fields within the occluded area expand severalfold in
diameter. When stimuli are then placed within the
receptive field, the field collapses down to its original
size. By alternately putting in and removing the mask
from the conditioning stimulus, the field can go
through several cycles of expansion and shrinkage
(Fig. 6; Pettet and Gilbert, 1992).
The mechanism of this reorganization is found in
processes that are intrinsic to the cortex, and are not
found at antecedent levels in the visual pathway. One
piece of evidence in support of this is the fact that it
shows interocular transfer: if the conditioning stimulus, the artificial scotoma, is presented to one eye,
one finds expansion of the receptive field in the other
eye (Volchan and Gilbert, 1992). This suggests that
the source of the expansion is cells with binocular
receptive fields, or at least ones receiving binocular
input. The next step is to ascertain the synaptic mechanism of the change. Evidence of changes in synaptic
weight that is correlated with the receptive field ex-

Cerebral Cortex Sep/Oct 1993, V 3 N 5 379

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

bert, 1991). Consequently, horizontal inputs may be
responsible for inhibitory as well as facilitatory receptive field properties.
The widespread connections seen within each cortical area are also reflected in the highly convergent
and divergent corticocortical connections between
successive stages in the visual pathway. The connections between different conical areas have a similar
distribution to the intrinsic horizontal connections,
in that they are widespread and their terminal arbors
are clustered. Conversely, a site in a given cortical
area receives input from clusters of cells in the antecedent cortical area (Fig. 2). The clustered intrinsic
and extrinsic corticocortical connections have been
seen in other visual areas, including V2, V3, and MT,
and in somatosensory, auditory and frontal cortex
(Gilbert and Kelly, 1975; Zeki, 1976; Goldman and
Nauta, 1977; Imig and Brugge, 1978;Jonesetal., 1978;
Gilbert and Wiesel, 1979,1983; Imig and Reale, 1981;
Tigges et al., 1981; Rockland and Lund, 1982; Weller
et al., 1984; DeFelipe et al., 1986; Rockland and Virga,
1990; Ojima et al., 1991, 1992; Lund et al., 1993). Just
as the horizontal connections show columnar specificity in visual cortex, similar specificities are observed
in auditory cortex (Imig and Reale, 1981).

i

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

s

<
\

\
\

\

\

\

<

\

<

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

s \ \ \ \ \ \
during scotoma

before

during center stim.

1 deg.
0 Hz

180 Dynamics of Visual Cortex • Gilbert

150 Hz

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

\

\

\

N

\
\

"Vi

Retina

1

1

i

i

1
1

7

1
__——-

1

Cortex -- 1st day

Cortex -- 2 months

Figure 7. EfTad of making retinal lesnrts on cortcal topography. The vtsuotopc axes are represented as the Cartesian gnd superimposed on the retina, and the corresponding
maps on the cortex in surface view. A lesion, made with a diode laser, destroys the photoreceptor layer in a restricted pan of the retina {shaded area, top], efiectively removing
visual mput from the cortical region representing thai retinal area (fetter left). To get an idea of the dimensions involved, in the primate, a lesion subtending 5° of visual Geld,
centered about 4° n the periphery, silences an area of cortex 10 mm in demeier. Over a period of 2 months the topography of the cortex is reorganized (tower right], with a
decreased representation of the sfetced mput, and an increased representation of tiv penleshm retina (GSben and Wiesel 1990, 1992; Kaas et al., 1990", Hetnen and Skavenski,
1991: reprinted from Gitet, 1992).

pansion comes form cross-correlation analysis. Ordinarily, cells with similar receptive field properties,
such as common orientation preference, show correlated firing. A cross-correlogram provides a measure
of the strength of connectivity between cells. If one
records from a pair of cells with adjacent receptive
fields, the strength of correlation, and hence the synaptic weight, increases as the receptive fields expand
and the amount of overlap increases. In vitro recordings in cortical slices show that the strength of the
horizontally evoked synaptic potentials becomes
greater with use. The supposition is that the receptive
field plasticity observed with conditioning with an
artificial scotoma may have a corresponding increase

in synaptic weights of excitatory connections, perhaps
the horizontal connections, in the cortical circuit.
Other demonstrations of sensitivity for context include response to illusory contours, which has been
shown in primate area 18 (Von der Heydt and Peterhans, 1989), response of supposedly "monocular" cells
in the cortical representation of the optic disk to stimulation of the other eye by lines passing through and
extending beyond the optic disk, a form of perceptual
completion (Fiorani et al., 1992), and sensitivity to
movement outside of the receptive field, altering cells'
responses to moving stimuli within the receptive field
(Allman et al., 1985; Tanaka et al., 1986: Gulyas et al.,
1987).

Figura 6. Effect of an artiiria) scotoma on receptive field see. Just as the retinal lesions are capable of producing a comidaanle expansnn in receptive field toe whhin minutes
after mating the lesion (Qlben and Wiesd 19S2). mimicking the lesion by rxctuding a small pan of the visual field abo causes recepm fields located within the occluded area
to expand (Penet and G3en, 1992). The upper pan shows the annlibiirnj stimulus: a pattern of fines moving outside the receptive field (the squara with a soU outline, with
the orientation specificity indicated by the n w hies pmouSng from the squaw). The fines disappear when they move within the masked area (the mask is infested by the donad
Una, but is not explicitly drawn m the stimulating pattern; the sumutat'sig Imes are shown as the btachned mangles, and the'rr disappearance a indicated by die open rectangles].
After 10 min of rerdnkming. the receptive field expands. This is Bustrated in die loner pan which gives a rwo-cSmemiona) response proSe of the cefi, widi do darter portions
showing die greater response. The size and pnsttnm of the acduder are indicated by do outhe in the center, and die enlarged receptive field is indicated whhin the outline.
Stimulating the center of rhe receptive field causes it to collapse in size, as indicated in die krwer right. The receptive field can be caused to expand and contract sttematery by
a sequence of surround ttimitetian fallowed by center stimulation. Adapted from Penet and GHtei (1992. thai R a t 1, 4); reprinted from GBben (1992).

Cerebral Cortex Sep/Oct 1993, V 3 N 5 381

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

\

X

X

o

u

H g n r e 8 . Receptive field maps in a region of monkey cortex deafferented by a retinal lesion, tmmedatery before the lesion was made |fefr) and 2 months following the lesion
{right). All recorded sites had cells with receptive fields located outside the lesioned retinal area. Though some arrow are crossed, overall the shifts mamtaaied a rough retmotopc
order, with fields that were originally located in the lower pan of the scotoma shifting down, and those located m the upper part shifting up. Note that for one she where the
receptive ield was initially located outside the lesion, the field shifted horizontally. This result was observed in several experiments, and indicates that the effects of the perturbation
caused by the lesion are propagated beyond the deafferemed area of cortex. There was also receptive field enlargement the field areas averaged 0.036 ± 0.022 degrees' before
the lesion and 0.100 ± 0.025 degrees1 2 months later \p <: 0.01). The Xs mark the foveal position. Reprinted from Gifcen and Wiesel {1992).

It has long been known that one's perception of
the attributes of localized features, such as brightness
or color, orientation, and position, can be influenced
by the context within which these features are presented (Westheimer et al., 1976; Westheimer and
McKee, 1977; Butler and Westheimer, 1978; Badcock
and Westheimer, 1985; Westheimer, 1986). Under
certain circumstances, context can induce the perception of brightness, color, lines, or textures at points
in the image where there is no physical stimulus present. These phenomena are referred to as perceptual
fill-in or illusory contours (Yarbus, 1957; Krauskopf,
1961; Kanizsa, 1979; Crane and Piantanida, 1983; Paradiso and Nakayama, 1991; Ramachandran and Gregory, 1991)- The visual system also tends to integrate
along contours, facilitating the salience of a contour
composed of a series of similarly oriented line segments (Fields et al., 1993). This principle is related
to the idea of "good continuation," one of the Gestalt
laws of perceptual grouping, and may be related to
visual segmentation. Which of these observations can
be related to the context dependency and mutability
of receptive fields seen in striate cortex remains to be
established, but at least in the domains of orientation
and position there appears to be a strong link.
We studied spatial localization around an artificial
scotoma in human psychophysical experiments (M.
Kapadia, C. D. Gilbert, and G. Westheimer, unpub3S2 Dynamics of Visual Cortex • Gilbert

lished observations). In experiments analogous to the
physiological studies, we asked subjects to determine
the position of short line segments in the vicinity of
an artificial scotoma. Lines located near the boundary
of the scotoma appear to be shifted toward the center
of the scotoma. The perceived shift may be related to
expansion of receptive fields within the scotoma: if
each cell represents a "labeled line" for a particular
visuotopic location, for example, the center of their
receptive fields, when a group of cells expand their
fields, stimuli located near the scotoma boundary cause
activation of more cells located near the center of the
scotoma than the outside the scotoma. This would
result in an estimate of visual field position shifting
toward the center of the scotoma. If the psychophysical experiments do reflect the same processes as the
physiological observations, then they provide a useful
measure of the time course of the changes: the positional shifts occur within one sec of conditioning
with the artificial scotoma.

Long-term Changes in Cortical Topography
When the visual system receives changes in sensory
experience for an extended period of time, even more
dramatic alterations in receptive fields and cortical
functional architecture can be seen. This is most dramatically shown when one makes lesions of the pe-

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

l

1°

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

figure 9 . Receptive fields of ceils encountered m venial electrode penetrations in the superficial layers of monkey area VI before and immediately after binocular retinal lesions
at reuntoakalty corresponding sites. The first sea of receptive field maps, made before the tenon, are shown on the top kh. with the subsequently made lesion included for
reference [dashed revs). The size and rerjnotopic positions of the receptive fields encountered in one ammal within minutes after mating the lesion sie shown on the (op right.
Using the cortxal vascutoture for reference [botm). the same recording sites were visited before and after the lesion so one could make a direct comparison of the receptive
6ekfe of cells encountered at these sites at the different tine poms. The recording sites made before the lesion [small Am] and after the lesion [large dots) are numbered, with
the corresponding receptive fields lumbered acmnftngfy. On the same day of the lesion a number of the origmafy recorded conies) sites were unresponsive to visual stimuli (as
nfcated by the & at the rap / # f f ) The most striking effect was that receptive fields originally
heated near die boundary of the lesion eipanded meklaauly, on average reaching
g
h lesion, the average field area at the recording sites was 0.07 ± 0.03 degrees2, and 0.37
0 3 ± 0.26 degrees2 immediately
d i l after
f the
h lesion
l i
five times their original area: before the
was made [p <c 0.01). In addition, there was a suggestion of a shift in receptive field position, from immediately inside to just outside the boundary of the tenon, though tros
shift was less than 1*. The arrows at the top right indicate the relative poshons of the receptive field centers of cells at nearby cortical sites recorded before and after the lesion,
with the starting center position of each receptive field indicated by the tai of the snow, and the ending position by the momhead. A few of the arrow pashions were interpolated
at points where the before and after recording sites were not sufSciendy dose. The positnn of the fovea is indicated by the Xs at the top right Reprinted from Gilbert and Wiesel
(1992)

riphery. Initially, when sensory input is removed by
retinal lesions, an area of cortex is left silenced, devoid of functioning input. Over a period of a few
months the silenced area recovers function, and it

develops a representation of a different part of the
retina than it represented before the lesion. The result
is an enlarged representation of the area of retina
outside the lesion (Fig. 7; Gilbert and Wiesel, 1992).
Cerebral Cortex Sep/Oct 1993, V 3 N 5 383

Even if the horizontal connections do not need to
become more widespread to allow for the reorganization, they do appear to become strengthened in
order to cause the shift in receptive field position.
The strengthening might involve various mechanisms, from potentiation of excitatory connections to
adaptation of inhibitory connections. From experiments with cortical slices we know that the horizontal
inputs can be strengthened by use (Hirsch and Gilbert, 1993), but this strengthening takes place after a
few seconds of conditioning, and is not something
normally requiring months to bring about. It is plausible that changes of this sort might be involved with
the receptive field alterations observed with an artificial scotoma, since these do occur in minutes. Something else might differentiate short- from long-term
changes, for example, morphological changes such
as synaptic proliferation. At this stage we have preliminary evidence indicating that there might be an
increase in the number of axon collaterals in the distant axon collateral clusters of cells projecting from

384 Dynamics of Visual Cortex • Gilbert

outside the cortical scotoma toward the center of the
scotoma (Darian-Smith and Gilbert, 1993).
Though the full-scale reorganization of cortical topography following retinal lesions takes a few months
to occur, one can observe dramatic changes within
minutes after making the lesions. Cells whose receptive fields are originally located near the boundary of
the scotoma greatly increase their receptive field size,
expanding into the part of visual field outside the
lesioned area, with topographical shifts on the order
of 1-2 mm (Fig. 9; Gilbert and Wiesel, 1992). Similarly, when a lesion is made in one eye, the cortex is
initially silenced, but small areas of inactivated cortex,
about 2 mm in diameter, can recover visual input a
few hours after enucleation of the unlesioned eye
(Chino et al., 1992). These findings might reflect the
fact that under ordinary circumstances cells are capable of integrating information over a large part of
visual space. Usually the inputs from outside the classic receptive field serve to modulate the response of
the cell, but under the appropriate pattern of stimulation they can be boosted to a suprathreshold level.
Removing the input that contributes to the receptive
field center, for example, might allow the more peripheral inputs to be potentiated.
In summary, the functional consequences of the
horizontal connections can be seen over several time
scales. The longest-term effects can mediate recovery
following lesions of the CNS. Shorter-term changes,
occurring within minutes, either after retinal lesions
or after conditioning with an artificial scotoma, reflect
a normal process of adaptation to changes in sensory
experience. The functional role of this adaptation may,
in primary visual cortex, be a normalization or calibration of the system to analysis of various visual attributes. In higher-order cortical areas the same
mechanisms may be applied to acquisition and storage of visual percepts. It may be that changes may
occur on an even shorter time scale, as suggested by
the psychophysical experiments. If so, receptive fields
may adjust their specificity dynamically, as one assimilates and analyzes each view. Any model of visual
processing will have to take into account that receptive field properties are dynamic, subject to the context within which features are presented and capable
of being shaped by visual experience. Importantly,
this mutability starts at the earliest cortical stages of
visual processing, including primary visual cortex.
Notes
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health
Grant EY07968, National Science Foundation Grant BNS
8918951, and a McKnight Development Award.
Correspondence should be addressed to Charles D. Gilben, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New
York, NY 10021-6399.
References
Allman JM, Miezin F, McGuinnes E (1985) Direction and
velocity specific surround in three cortical visual areas
of the owl monkey. Perception 14:105-126.
Badcock DR, Westheimer G (1985) Spatial location and
hyperacuity: the centre-surround localization function has
two substrates. Vision Res 25:1259-1269.

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

For individual cortical cells the receptive fields shift
from positions within the lesioned part of the retina
to loci surrounding the lesion. In cortical terms the
size of the shift is on the order of 3-4 mm, similar in
extent to the horizontal connections. In receptive field
terms this of course depends on the retinotopic location of the lesion, but in primates, at about 5° eccentricity, the receptive field shift is on the order of
6° (Fig. 8; Gilbert and Wiesel, 1992).
Though the magnitude of the shift corresponds
closely to the extent of horizontal connections, one
has to establish whether the reorganization is occurring within the cortex or at antecedent steps in the
visual pathway, and to ascertain which sets of connections are responsible for propagating visual information from outside to within the cortical scotoma.
We approached the first question by mapping the scotoma in the LGN at a time when the cortical scotoma
had filled in. These experiments show that little reorganization occurs in the LGN, which retains a large
area that cannot be activated by visual stimuli (Gilbert
and Wiesel, 1992). The size of this area corresponds
to the normal representation of the lesioned retina,
indicating that most of the reorganization seen in
cortex is intrinsic to the cortex (Darian-Smith et al.,
1992). Within the cortex, several classes of connections are potentially responsible: thalamic afferents,
horizontal intrinsic connections arising from pyramidal cells, and feedback connections from higher
cortical areas. The thalamic input is more restricted
in its lateral spread than the horizontal connections,
so by itself would be insufficient to account for the
degree of reorganization observed. Sprouting of thalamocortical connections could, however cause the
effect. When one maps the extent of the thalamocortical input to cortex by injection of multiple fluorescent retrograde tracers, there appears to be no
such increase in its lateral spread. This leaves us with
the horizontal connections and feedback connections, which are normally long enough to account for
the observed reorganization.

Imig TJ, Brugge JF (1978) Sources and terminations of
callosal axons related to binaural and frequency maps in
primary auditory cortex of the cat. J Comp Neurol 182:
637-660.
Imig TJ, Reale RA (1981) Ipsilateral corticocortical projections related to binaural columns in cat primary auditory cortex. J Comp Neurol 203:1-14.
Jones EG, Coulter JD, Hendry SHC (1978) Intracortical
connectivity of architectonic fields in the somatic sensory, motor and parietal cortex of monkeys. J Comp Neurol 181:291-348.
Kaas JH, Krubitzer LA, Chino YM, Langston AL, Polley EH,
Blair N (1990) Reorganization of retinotopic cortical
maps In adult mammals after lesions of the retina. Science
248:229-231.
KanizsaG (1979) Organization in vision. Essays on Gestalt
perception. New York: Praeger.
Krauskopf J (1961) Heterochromatic stabilized images: a
classroom demonstration. Am J Psychol 80:632-637.
Lorente de No R (1944) Cerebral cortex: architecture, intracortical connections, motor projections. In: Physiology of the nervous system (Fulton JF, ed), pp 291-325.
London: Oxford UP
Lund JS (1973) Organization of neurons in the visual cortex, area 17, of the monkey (Macaca mulatto). J Comp
Neurol 147:455-496.
Lund JS, Boothe RG (1975) Interlaminar connections and
pyramidal neuron organization in the visual cortex, area
17, of the macaque monkey. J Comp Neurol 159:305-334.
Lund JS, Yoshioka T, Levitt JB (1993) Comparison of intrinsic connectivity in different areas of macaque monkey
cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 3:148-162.
Martin KAC, Whittendge D (1984) Form, function and intracortical projections of spiny neurones in the striate
visual cortex of the cat. J Physiol (Lond) 353:463-504.
McGuire BA, Hornung JP, Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1984)
Patterns of synaptic input to layer 4 of cat striate cortex.
J Neurosci 4:3021-3033.
McGuire BA, Gilbert CD, Rivlin PK, Wiesel TN (1991) Targets of horizontal connections in macaque primary visual
cortex. J Comp Neurol 305:370-392.
Murphy PC, Slllito AM (1987) Corticofugal feedback influences the generation of length tuning in the visual pathway Nature 329:727-729.
Ojima H, Honda CN, Jones EG (1991) Patterns of axon
collateralization of identified supragranular pyramidal
neurons in the cat auditory cortex. Cereb Cortex 1:8094
Ojima H, Honda CN, Jones EG (1992) Characteristics of
intracellularly injected infragranular pyramidal neurons
in cat primary auditory cortex. Cereb Cortex 2:197-216.
O'LearyJL (1941) Structure of the area striata of the cat. J
Comp Neurol 75.131-161.
Paradiso MA, Nakayama K (1991) Brightness perception
and fillingin. Vision Res 31:1221-1236.
Pettet MW, Gilbert CD (1992) Dynamic changes in recep
tlve field size in cat primary visual cortex. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 89:8366-8370
Ramachandran VS, Gregory TL (1991) Perceptual filling in
of artificially induced scotomas in human vision. Nature
350:699-702.
Ramon yCajalS (1911) Histologie du systeme nerveux de
l'homme et des vertebres. Reprint. Madrid: CSIC, 1972.
Rockland KS, Lund JS (1982) Widespread periodic intrin
sic connections in the tree shew visual cortex. Brain Res
169:19-40.
Rockland KS, Lund JS (1983) Intrinsic laminar lattice connections in primate visual cortex. J Comp Neurol 216:
303-318.
Rockland KS, Virga A (1990) Organization of individual
cortical axons projecting from area VI (area 17) to V2
(area 18) in the macaque monkey Vis Neurosci 4:11-28.
Tanaka K, Hikosaka K, Saito H, Yukie M, Fukada Y, Iwai E
(1986) Analysis of local and wide-field movements in
the superior temporal visual areas of the macaque monkey. J Neurosci 6:134-144.
Cerebral Cortex Sep/Oct 1993, V 3 N 5 385

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

BolzJ, Gilbert CD (1986) Generation of end-inhibition in
the visual cortex via interlaminar connections. Nature
320:362-364.
Bolz J, Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1989) Pharmacological
analysis of cortical circuitry. Trends Neurosci 12:292-296.
Butler T, Westheimer G (1978) Interference with stereoscopic acuity: spatial, temporal, and disparity tuning. Vision Res 18:1387-1392.
Chino YM, Kaas JH, Smith EL 111, Langston AL, Cheng H
(1992) Rapid reorganization of cortical maps in adult
cats following restricted deafferentation in retina. Vision
Res 32:789-796.
Crane HD, Piantanida TP (1983) On seeing reddish green
and yellowish blue. Science 221:1078-1079.
Darian-Smith C, Gilbert CD (1993) Role of laterally projecting intrinsic fibers in topographic reorganization of
visual cortex in adult cats. Soc Neurosci Abstr, in press.
Darian-Smith C, Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1992) Cortical
reorganization following binocular focal retinal lesions
in the adult cat and monkey. Soc Neurosci Abstr 18:11.
DeFillpe J, Hendry SHC, Jones EG (1986) A correlative
electron microscopic study of basket cells and large
GABAergic neurons in the monkey sensory-motor cortex.
Neuroscience 17:991-1009.
Field DJ, Hayes A, Hess RF (1993) Contour integration by
the human visual system: evidence for a local "association field." Vision Res 3:173-193.
Fiorani M Jr, Rosa MGP, Gattass R, Rocha-Mlranda CE
(1992) Dynamic surrounds of receptive fields in primate
striate cortex: a physiological basis for perceptual completion? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:8547-8551
Gibson JJ, Radner M (1937) Adaptation, aftereffect and
contrast in the perception of titled lines. J Exp Psychol
20:453-467.
Gilbert CD (1977) Laminar differences in receptive field
properties of cells in cat primary visual cortex. J Physiol
(Lond) 268:381^21.
Gilbert CD, Kelly JP (1975) The projections of cells in
different layers of the cat's visual cortex. J Comp Neurol
163:81-106.
Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1979) Morphology and intracortical projections of functionally identified neurons in cat
visual cortex. Nature 280:120-125.
Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1983) Clustered intrinsic connections in cat visual cortex. J Neurosci 3:1116-1133.
Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1989) Columnar specificity of intrinsic horizontal and corticocortical connections in cat
visual cortex. J Neurosci 9:2432-2442.
Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1990) The influence of contextual
stimuli on the orientation selectivity of cells in primary
visual cortex of the cat. Vision Res 30:1689-1701.
Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1992) Receptive field dynamics in
adult primary visual cortex. Nature 356:150-152.
Goldman PS, Nauta WJH (1977) Columnar distribution of
cortico-cortical fibers in the frontal association, llmbic
and motor cortex of the developing rhesus monkey. Brain
Res 122:393-413.
Gulyas B, Orban GA, Duysens J, Maes H (1987) The suppressive influence of moving texture background on responses of cat striate neurons to moving bars. J Physiol
(Paris) 57:1767-1791.
Heinen SJ, Skavenski AA (1991) Recovery of visual responses in foveal VI neurons following bilateral foveal
lesions in adult monkey. Exp Brain Res 83:670-674.
Hirsch JA, Gilbert CD (1991) Synaptic physiology of horizontal connections in the cat's visual cortex. J Neurosci
11:1800-1809.
Hirsch J, Gilbert CD (1993) Long-term changes in synaptic
strength along specific intrinsic pathways in the cat's visual cortex. J Physiol (Lond) 461-247-262.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN (1962) Receptive fields, binocular
interaction and functional architecture in the cat's visual
cortex. J Physiol (Lond) 160:106-154.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN (1974) Uniformity of monkey striate
cortex: a parallel relationship between field size, scatter
and magnification factor. J Comp Neurol 158:295-306.

388 Dynamics of Visual Cortex • Gilbert

Downloaded from http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/ at OCLC on May 30, 2016

Tigges J, Tigges M, Anschel S, Cross NA, Letbetter WD,
McBride RL (1981) Areal and laminar distribution of
neurons interconnecting the central visual cortical areas
17, 18, 19 and MT in squirrel monkey (Saimiri).] Comp
Neural 202:539-560.
Ts'o D, Gilbert CD (1988) The organization of chromatic
and spatial interactions in the primate striate cortex. J
Neurosci 8:1712-1727.
Ts'o D, Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN (1986) Relationships between horizontal and functional architecture in cat striate
cortex as revealed by cross-correlation analysis. J Neurosci 61160-1170.
Volchan E, Gilbert CD (1992) Cortical mechanisms of receptive field expansion in the cat striate cortex. Soc Neurosci Abstr 18:209.
Von der Heydt R, Peterhans E (1989) Mechanisms of contour perception in monkey visual cortex. I. Lines of pattern discontinuity. J Neurosci 9:1731-1748.
Weller RE, Wall JT, Kaas JH (1984) Cortical connections
of the middle temporal visual area (MT) and the superior
temporal cortex in owl monkeys. J Comp Neurol 228:81104.
Westheimer G (1986) Spatial interaction in the domain of
disparity signals in human stereoscopic vision J Physiol
(Lond) 370:619-629.
Westheimer G (1990) Simultaneous orientation contrast
for lines in the human fovea. Vision Res 301913-1921.
Westheimer G, McKee SP (1977) Spatial configurations for
visual hyperacuity. Vision Res 17:941-949.
Westheimer G.ShimamuraK, McKee S (1976) Interference
with line orientation sensitivity. J Opt Soc Am 66-332338.
Yarbus AL (1957) The perception of an image fixed with
respect to the retina. Biophysics 2:683-690
Zeki SM (1976) The projections to the superior temporal
sulcus from areas 17 and 18 in the rhesus monkey. Proc
R Soc Lond [Biol] 193:199-207.

