J Neurophysiol 114: 2353–2367, 2015.
First published August 19, 2015; doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014.

Open-loop organization of thalamic reticular nucleus and dorsal thalamus: a
computational model
Adam M. Willis,1,2 Bernard J. Slater,3 Ekaterina D. Gribkova,4 and Daniel A. Llano3,4,5
1

Department of Neurology, San Antonio Military Medical Center, Fort Sam Houston, Texas; 2Department of Theoretical and
Applied Mechanics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois; 3Neuroscience Program, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois; 4Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois; and 5Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, Urbana, Illinois
Submitted 18 November 2014; accepted in final form 17 August 2015

Willis AM, Slater BJ, Gribkova ED, Llano DA. Open-loop
organization of thalamic reticular nucleus and dorsal thalamus: a
computational model. J Neurophysiol 114: 2353–2367, 2015. First
published August 19, 2015; doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014.—The thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) is a shell of GABAergic neurons that
surrounds the dorsal thalamus. Previous work has shown that TRN
neurons send GABAergic projections to thalamocortical (TC) cells to
form reciprocal, closed-loop circuits. This has led to the hypothesis
that the TRN is responsible for oscillatory phenomena, such as sleep
spindles and absence seizures. However, there is emerging evidence
that open-loop circuits are also found between TRN and TC cells. The
implications of open-loop configurations are not yet known, particularly when they include time-dependent nonlinearities in TC cells
such as low-threshold bursting. We hypothesized that low-threshold
bursting in an open-loop circuit could be a mechanism by which the
TRN could paradoxically enhance TC activation, and that enhancement would depend on the relative timing of TRN vs. TC cell
stimulation. To test this, we modeled small circuits containing TC
neurons, TRN neurons, and layer 4 thalamorecipient cells in both
open- and closed-loop configurations. We found that open-loop TRN
stimulation, rather than universally depressing TC activation, increased cortical output across a broad parameter space, modified the
filter properties of TC neurons, and altered the mutual information
between input and output in a frequency-dependent and T-type calcium channel-dependent manner. Therefore, an open-loop model of
TRN-TC interactions, rather than suppressing transmission through
the thalamus, creates a tunable filter whose properties may be modified by outside influences onto the TRN. These simulations make
experimentally testable predictions about the potential role for the
TRN for flexible enhancement of cortical activation.
burst; T-type calcium channels; thalamic reticular nucleus; thalamocortical neurons; thalamus

is a critical checkpoint for all information that
reaches the cerebral cortex. Despite many decades of scientific
investigation, its role in sensory information processing has
remained unclear. One key to understanding the role of the
thalamus likely lies in its interactions with a closely related and
mysterious structure known as the thalamic reticular nucleus
(TRN). The TRN is a thin layer of GABAergic neurons that
partially surrounds the dorsal thalamus,1 and its neurons innervate thalamocortical (TC) neurons (Pinault 2004). The TRN
has been widely speculated to play prominent roles in a host of
THE THALAMUS

Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: D. A. Llano, 2355 Beckman
Inst., 405 N. Mathews, Urbana, IL 61801 (e-mail: d-llano@illinois.edu).
1
Note that many authors use the term “dorsal thalamus” to refer to the
structure that is commonly called “thalamus.” In this report, for simplicity, the
word “thalamus” does not refer to ventral thalamic structures such as the TRN.
www.jn.org

brain functions, such as maintenance of arousal (Llinás and
Paré 1991; Steriade et al. 1993a), selective attention (Crick
1984; Guillery et al. 1998; McAlonan et al. 2008), the production of sleep spindles (Destexhe et al. 1994), and, in pathological
states, the production of seizures (McCormick and Contreras
2001), and may contain functional subnetworks subserving these
myriad functions (Halassa et al. 2014). Despite the wealth of data
derived from slice physiological studies about the TRN, the
specific role of the TRN in modulating larger-scale brain activity
has been difficult to elucidate, in part because the TRN is a small,
deep structure and therefore difficult to study in vivo. For this
reason, computational models can be used to build bridges between the microcircuit-level analysis of the TRN and networklevel phenomena.
TRN neurons receive input from branches of TC axons en
route to the cortex as well as branches from corticothalamic
axons en route to the thalamus (Pinault 2004). Early models of
TRN function postulated that TC neurons and TRN neurons are
reciprocally innervated (Steriade et al. 1993a). Models including reciprocal thalamic-TRN innervation reproduce wellknown oscillatory phenomena thought to be generated in the
thalamus, such as spindle oscillations and absence seizures
(Destexhe et al. 1993, 1999; Huguenard 1998). However, there
are emerging data suggesting that there are additional nonreciprocal or open-loop arrangements between the thalamus and
TRN. For example, the TRN receives input from regions of the
thalamus that do not receive returning axons from the TRN
(Crabtree and Isaac 2002; Kimura 2014; Kimura et al. 2007;
Pinault and Deschênes 1998). In addition, the sensory portions
of the TRN receive input from nonsensory parts of the forebrain, such as the prefrontal cortex (Zikopoulos and Barbas
2006), basal forebrain (Asanuma and Porter 1990; Bickford et
al. 1994; Pita-Almenar et al. 2014; Sun et al. 2013), and
amygdala (Zikopoulos and Barbas 2012). These types of openloop circuits may provide a substrate by which TC transmission may be modulated by regions of the brain not classically
associated with sensory processing, possibly to permit attentional or emotional demands to modify sensory processing.
A key component for the potential of the TRN to shape the
coding properties of the thalamus is the low-threshold bursting
behavior of TC neurons. Hyperpolarization of TC neurons
leads to deinactivation of T-type calcium channels, which
changes the response mode of TC cells from tonic, single-spike
firing to low-threshold, burst firing (Jones 2007; Sherman
2001). Low-threshold bursting allows hyperpolarized thalamic
neurons not only to respond to stimuli that would normally be
2353

2354

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

subthreshold but also to respond to such stimuli with a burst of
two to five action potentials. Previous experimental and computational work has established that bursts are a reliable way to
send a high-efficacy signal to a postsynaptic target and are
likely a more suitable mode for signal detection than spikes in
tonic mode (Denning and Reinagel 2005; Goense et al. 2003;
Krahe and Gabbiani 2004; Lisman 1997; Mukherjee and Kaplan 1995; Person and Perkel 2005; Reinagel et al. 1999; Smith
et al. 2000; Swadlow and Gusev 2001). In the case of the TC
synapse, since this synapse induces large postsynaptic currents
but is highly depressing (Chung et al. 2002; Gil et al. 1999;
Stratford et al. 1996), a burst of action potentials arriving after
a period of quiescence (as required by the voltage- and time
sensitivity of T-type calcium channels) would have a high
likelihood of inducing a postsynaptic response in a cortical
neuron. In contrast, thalamic cells in “tonic” mode have a
lower likelihood of inducing a cortical response because the
tonically arriving individual spikes would likely meet a depressed synapse. Therefore, the TRN appears poised to induce
a switch from tonic to burst firing based on its ability to
hyperpolarize TC neurons. However, because of the time
required to deinactivate the T-type calcium channels (Jahnsen
and Llinas 1984), the TRN may also simply suppress incoming
signals to the thalamus if those signals arrive prior to T-channel
deinactivation. Therefore, the TRN is strategically situated to
influence the flow of information passing through the thalamus
and may enhance or suppress thalamic responsiveness, depending on the relative timing of afferent inputs and TRN activation.
An important consideration for any theory of thalamic function that involves the use of bursts as a means to carry sensory
information is whether or not bursts are seen during the awake
state. Several studies have shown that a mixture of bursting and
individual spikes is seen in awake animals (Fanselow et al.
2001; Guido and Weyand 1995; Ortuño et al. 2014; Ramcharan
et al. 2005), suggesting that the excitability of thalamic neurons
may be actively modulated during wakefulness. This is consistent with the finding that injection of currents into thalamic
cells in vitro, similar to those recorded in vivo, produces a
mixture of single spikes and bursts (Wolfart et al. 2005). It is
also important to note that bursts per se are not critical for the
potential for the TRN to boost thalamic output. This is because
the low-threshold potentiation of depolarization created by T
currents, which may only produce one or two spikes riding a
slow calcium wave, may also enhance cortical activation.
Because these spikes necessarily follow a period of quiescence,
they would not be subject to the strong temporal filtering at the
TC synapse (Deleuze et al. 2012).
Therefore, given 1) the presence of extrinsic inputs from
remote brain regions onto TRN neurons, 2) the potential for
TRN neurons to potentiate thalamic output by creating bursts,
and 3) the strong temporal filtering present at the TC synapse,
we hypothesized that stimulation of the TRN could paradoxically enhance cortical responses to sensory stimuli. Furthermore, we hypothesized that this enhancement would only be
seen at particular rates of TRN and sensory input. To test these
ideas and to generate quantitative predictions that could be
tested experimentally, we constructed a computational model
containing TC cells, TRN cells, fast-spiking (FS) interneurons,
and thalamorecipient cells in layer 4 (L4) of the cortex and
explored the dynamics of this network as TRN inputs were

modulated. Preliminary results of this work were previously
presented in abstract form (Willis and Llano 2012).
METHODS

All surgical procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee at the University of Illinois. All animals
were housed in animal care facilities approved by the Association for
Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International. Every attempt was made to minimize the number of animals
used and to reduce suffering at all stages of the study.
Physiological recordings. Balb/c mice (30 – 40 days of age) were
bred in house from breeders purchased from Harlan Laboratories. To
obtain slices, mice were deeply anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbital (50 mg/kg), then transcardially perfused with an
ice-cold high-sucrose cutting solution (in mM: 206 sucrose, 10.0
MgCl2, 11.0 glucose, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 0.5 CaCl2, 2.5
KCl, pH 7.4), and had brains removed quickly. Coronal tissue slices
(300 ␮m) were cut with a vibrating tissue slicer and transferred to a
holding chamber containing oxygenated incubation artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF; in mM: 126 NaCl, 3.0 MgCl2, 10.0 glucose, 1.25
NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 1.0 CaCl2, 2.5 KCl, pH 7.4) and incubated at
32°C for 1 h prior to recording.
Whole cell recordings were performed with a visualized slice setup
outfitted with infrared-differential interference contrast optics and
performed at 32°C. During recordings, tissue was bathed in recording
aCSF (in mM: 126 NaCl, 2.0 MgCl2, 10.0 glucose, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 26
NaHCO3, 2.0 CaCl2, 2.5 KCl, pH 7.4). Recordings were done in the
absence, and the presence, of tetrodotoxin (TTX). TTX was added to
the bath at a 1 ␮M concentration to eliminate spikes to permit
parameter matching for the underlying membrane properties (see
below). Recording pipettes were pulled from borosilicate glass capillary tubes and had tip resistances of ϳ5 M⍀ when filled with
solution, which contained (in mM) 117 K-gluconate, 13 KCl, 1.0
MgCl2, 0.07 CaCl2, 0.1 ethylene glycol-bis(␤-aminoethyl ether)-N, N,
N=, N=-tetraacetic acid, 10.0 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid, 2.0 Na-ATP, 0.4 Na-GTP, and 0.5% biocytin, pH 7.3.
Thalamic areas were identified via landmarks readily visualized in the
slice. The data for the present study come from neurons in the ventral
posterior medial part of the thalamus, from the TRN, and from FS and
regular-spiking cells in cortical L4. We used the Multiclamp 700B
amplifier (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) and pCLAMP software (Molecular Devices) for data acquisition (20-kHz sampling).
Multiple cells were recorded from each class (TC, TRN, L4 regular
spiking and FS). A representative neuron from each class was chosen
to be modeled. This approach was used rather than averaging parameters across neurons because using parameter averages may lead to
modeling of cell parameter combinations that may not exist in reality.
Our choice of modeling representative neurons still allows exploration
of a broad range of parameters to examine the impact of those
parameter changes on model performance (e.g., Fig. 8).
Model architecture. Single-compartment models of TC, TRN, FS,
and L4 cells were built with a Hodgkin-Huxley framework with
membrane potential V modeled by the first-order differential equation
for a single-compartment neuron:
Cm ϭ

dV
dt

ϭ g L͑ V Ϫ E L͒ ϩ

n

͚ gi͑V͒͑V Ϫ Ei͒ ϩ Ie
iϭ1

where gL is the leak conductance, EL is the leak reversal potential, Cm
is the capacitance of the membrane, n is the number of channels, gi(V)
is the conductance of the ith channel, Ei is the reversal potential of the
ith channel, and Ie is the externally applied current to the cell. The
conductances of each channel are semiempirically modeled by activation and inactivation variables. Our TC model used the same model
as Deleuze et al. (2012) and included a T-type calcium channel, an H
current, as well as fast sodium current and delayed rectifying potas-

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

sium current. For complete mathematical description of model, please
refer to Deleuze et al. (2012). A similar computational model was also
used to describe the dynamics of TRN cells, with parameters changed
to match physiological recordings from TRN cells. A slow-inactivating potassium current (KS current; Pospischil et al. 2008; Yamada et
al. 1989) was added to this model to account for spike-frequency
adaptation seen in our TRN recordings. The L4 and FS cells were
modeled with the regular-spiking neuron and FS cell described by
Pospichil et al. (2008) and had parameters modified to match our
recorded neurons. See Table 1 for list of model cellular parameters.
To ensure that the findings of this study are not the result of the
idiosyncrasies of a select group of neurons, key parameters were
estimated across 30 recorded neurons (10 from each: TC, TRN, and
L4) and are shown in Table 2.
The model contains an input stream representing sensory afferents
to the TC cell (e.g., optic tract input to the visual thalamus), here
referred to as “afferent” stimulation. In the nonreciprocal network, the
TRN received synaptic input that was independent of afferent input to
the TC cell. The initial parameters for our synapses were derived from
the following publications: retinogeniculate (Chen and Regehr 2003),
thalamocortical (Laurent et al. 2002), reticulothalamic (Wanaverbecq
et al. 2008), and thalamoreticular (Gentet and Ulrich 2003). The
synapse derived from a hypothetical remote source (e.g., the
amygdala, nonsensory cortex, basal forebrain) to the TRN was modeled as a generic excitatory synapse with mild paired-pulse depression
(recovery time constant ϭ 40 ms). It is recognized that very little is

Table 1. Model cellular parameters
TC cell
Leak conductance
Leak equilibrium potential
Fast sodium conductance
Sodium equilibrium potential
Potassium conductance
Potassium equilibrium potential
T-current amplitude
Calcium equilibrium potential
H-current amplitude
H-current equilibrium potential
L4 cell
Leak conductance
Leak equilibrium potential
Fast sodium conductance
Sodium equilibrium potential
Potassium conductance
Potassium equilibrium potential
M-current amplitude
TRN cell
Leak conductance
Leak equilibrium potential
Fast sodium conductance
Sodium equilibrium potential
Potassium conductance
Potassium equilibrium potential
T-current amplitude
H-current amplitude
H-current equilibrium potential
KS-current amplitude
KS current ␶
FS cell
Leak conductance
Leak equilibrium potential
Fast sodium conductance
Sodium equilibrium potential
Potassium conductance
Potassium equilibrium potential
H-current amplitude

3.263 nS
Ϫ60.03 mV
1,500 nS
50 mV
520 nS
Ϫ100 mV
45 nS
120 mV
0.608 nS
Ϫ33 mV
4.8128 nS
Ϫ60.2354 mV
3,000 nS
50 mV
140 nS
Ϫ90 mV
1.5 nS
3.7928 nS
Ϫ57 mV
3,000 nS
50 mV
400 nS
Ϫ100 mV
21 nS
0.0192 nS
Ϫ33 mV
3.5 nS
200 ms
8.252 nS
Ϫ76 mV
300 nS
50 mV
1,100 nS
Ϫ100 mV
0 nS

TC, thalamocortical; TRN, thalamic reticular nucleus; FS, fast spiking; L4,
layer 4; KS current, slow-inactivating potassium current; ␶, time constant.

2355

Table 2. Averaged parameter estimates from 10 cells in each
class (TC, TRN, and L4)
TC cell
Leak conductance
Leak equilibrium potential
T-current amplitude
H-current amplitude
L4 cell
Leak conductance
Leak equilibrium potential
M-current amplitude
TRN cell
Leak conductance
Leak equilibrium potential
T-current amplitude
H-current amplitude

3.09 (0.91) nS
Ϫ57.4 (9.0) mV
49.1 (11.0) nS
0.94 (0.57) nS
5.24 (2.33) nS
Ϫ64.7 (9.6) mV
1.06 (0.58) nS
4.80 (1.49) nS
Ϫ53.6 (3.9) mV
24.5 (12.0) nS
0.04 (0.07) nS

Values are means (SD); n ϭ 10.

currently known about such synapses, and the neurotransmitters used
likely differ in different projections (e.g., acetylcholine or GABA
from the basal forebrain; Asanuma and Porter 1990; Bickford et al.
1994; Pita-Almenar et al. 2014; Sun et al. 2013), likely glutamate
from the cortex since this is used in other corticoreticular (Gentet and
Ulrich 2004) and corticothalamic (Kao and Coulter 1997; Turner and
Salt 1998) projections. For this reason we explored a range of synaptic
strengths for this synapse spanning two orders of magnitude and
examined the effect of these strengths on model behavior (see Fig.
8D). As more is learned about the myriad pathways that impinge upon
the TRN, this model may be refined. Several other parameters were
systematically varied to explore their impact on network behavior. All
external inputs to the TC and TRN cells were either trains of pulses at
a fixed rate or Poisson-modulated pulse trains comprising individual
pulses lasting one time step (0.1 ms).
The parameter space of each neuron’s possible conductances is
rather large, and to model neurons that are realistic, computational
models were matched to recordings from TC cells, TRN cells, L4
regular-spiking cells or FS cells, described above. Matching was
performed with a hybrid approach of simplex minimization (Nelder
and Mead 1965) and hand parameter matching. The shape and depth
of cell’s depolarization were matched in a point-to-point fashion
under conditions in which an external current of Ϫ100 pA was
applied. Matching occurred by allowing Cm, gL, EL, and the conductances of both the T-type calcium channel and the H-type current to be
varied by the simplex optimizer. By focusing on matching the hyperpolarization curve, a good qualitative match was achieved between
our simulation posthyperpolarization calcium T current and a TC cell
recorded in whole cell current clamp in the presence of TTX. The
conductance of the T-type calcium channel, the firing threshold of the
fast sodium channel, as well as the conductances of the sodium and
potassium channels were hand adjusted to match the number of spikes
contained in a tonic depolarization with 100 pA as well as the number
of spikes in a burst following a Ϫ100-pA hyperpolarization. As has
been done previously (Bazhenov et al. 2002), modifications of resting
membrane potential of the TC cell model were accomplished by
adjusting the leak current gL. For the TRN neuron, adjustments were
made in the leak potential EL rather than gL, because changes made in
gL to depolarize cells were countered by the KS current.
All synapses were modeled using the depressing synapse model of
Tsodyks and Markram (1997). This model assumes a finite number of
resources that are in an active, inactive, or recovered state. These
resources can be thought of as vesicles filled with neurotransmitter.
Action potentials activate a set fraction USE of the available recovered
resources to the active state, which then transition to an inactive state
with a linear time constant ␶inact. The inactive resources then recover
with a time constant ␶recov. To have realistic models of each synapse
in our simulation, we used simplex minimization (described above) to
select optimal parameters to matched published data of inhibitory

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

2356

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

postsynaptic currents (IPSCs), excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs), or excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) of our respective
synapses (see Table 3 for listing of synaptic parameters).
Mutual information calculations. Mutual information (MI) between the afferent spike train to the TC neuron and the output spike
train measured at the L4 cortical neuron was evaluated with an MI
estimator:
MI ϭ

M

Pijout,in
Pijout,inlog 2 out in
Pi P j
j

M

͚i ͚

in
Where Pout,
is the joint probability of an input event and an output
ij
event (both defined below), Pin
j is the marginal probability of an input
event, Pout
is the marginal probability of an output event, i ϭ bin
i
number (when using the output marginal probability), j ϭ bin number
(when using the input marginal probability) and M ϭ total number of
bins.
The uniform partition to compute MI does not work well for
processes with incomparable timescales (Darbellay and Vajda 1999;
Marek and Tichavsky 2008). Therefore, because of significant differences in L4 firing rates observed across different afferent input rates,
a variant of the adaptive partition (Cellucci et al. 2005) has been
applied. The partitioning used here relies on output spike intervals to
take into account different rates of L4 output spikes observed with
different rates of afferent input spikes. If a uniform partition had been
used, the different rates of L4 output spikes would have created a
different resolution of analysis for each afferent input rate, confounding comparisons across afferent input rates.
Input events were defined as being the spikes from the afferent
input to the TC cell (i.e., spikes in an optic tract axon). For each output

Table 3. Model synaptic parameters
External synapse to TC cell
Conductance
␶recov
␶inact
Equilibrium potential
USE
External synapse to TRN cell
Conductance
␶recov
␶inact
Equilibrium potential
USE
TRN-to-TC cell synapse
Conductance
␶recov
␶inact
Equilibrium potential
USE
TC-to-TRN cell synapse
Conductance
␶recov
␶inact
Equilibrium potential
USE
TC-to-L4 or FS synapse
Conductance
␶recov
␶inact
Equilibrium potential
USE
FS-to-L4 synapse
Conductance
␶recov
␶inact
Equilibrium potential
USE

32 nS
125 ms
2.64 ms
0 mV
0.76
32 nS
40 ms
10.58 ms
0 mV
0.3
80 nS
167.29 ms
16.62 ms
Ϫ80 mV
0.62
150 nS
500 ms
2.64 ms
0 mV
0.76
50 nS
160 ms
11.52 ms
0 mV
0.8113
50 nS
511.41 ms
7.162 ms
Ϫ100 mV
0.2

␶recov, ␶inact, time constants of recovery, transition to inactive state; USE, set
fraction of available recovered resources to active state.

interval ⌬tout
i , these inputs were represented as the number of spikes
ni. N is defined as the total number of input spikes on the whole time
series. Therefore, the marginal probability of an input event was
defined as
Piin ϭ

ni
N

Output events were defined as the intervals between spikes in the
L4 neuron. Therefore, the marginal probability of an output event was
defined as
Piout ϭ

⌬tiout
T

where T ϭ total simulation time.
The joint probability Pout, in for any combination of ni and ⌬tout
was
i
calculated by constructing a two-dimensional matrix with output
interval bins on the horizontal axis and input spike number in each bin
on the vertical axis. Entries on the diagonal of the matrix all equal 1/N.
Off-diagonal entries equal either zero for unique combinations of ni
and ⌬tout
or 1/N for repeated values of ni for a given ⌬tout
i
i . Therefore,
for any input-output sequences that were highly predictable (i.e., a
similar number of input spikes for every output interval), Pout, in was
maximized. For uncorrelated input-output sequences, most off-diagonal entries to the matrix were 0, minimizing Pout, in.
The simulations were all coded in MATLAB. All time integration
was accomplished with a hybrid analytic-numerical integration
scheme proposed by Moore and Ramon (1974), which provides
numerically accurate solutions to Hodgkin-Huxley models while
maintaining a reasonable computational cost. All simulations were run
on a Dell XPS machine using a Windows operating system. Thalamocortical transfer functions were plotted as L4 spike output (y-axis) vs.
afferent stimulation rate (x-axis). Bandwidth was computed by using
the standard deviation of a Gaussian function fitted to the transfer
function (with GraphPad software).
RESULTS

Model comparison to physiological data. Consistent with
many previous reports (Jahnsen and Llinas 1984; Jones 2007;
Sherman 2001), depolarization of a real thalamic neuron from
its resting potential leads to trains of individual action potentials, with firing rates that are dependent on the degree of
depolarization and with rates that show minimal adaptation
over time (Fig. 1B). Hyperpolarization of the same cell leads to
a delayed drift of depolarization that is most apparent toward
the end of the hyperpolarizing current pulse. This depolarizing
drift is likely a consequence of an underlying hyperpolarization-activated cation current (a.k.a. the sag current), known to
exist in TC neurons (Lüthi and McCormick 1998). This depolarization drift is followed by a rebound slow potential with a
burst of fast action potentials riding on top of the slow potential
(i.e., the “burst”; Fig. 1B). Similar to the real thalamic neuron,
and previous reports with a similar model (Deleuze et al. 2012;
Destexhe et al. 1998), our model thalamic neuron also fired
trains of individual action potentials when depolarized, showed
a sag current late during hyperpolarization, and had a burst of
fast action potentials riding a slow depolarization after the
injection of negative current (Fig. 1C). Modeled TRN neurons
also showed bursting after hyperpolarization, as seen in real
TRN neurons (Fig. 1, D and E; Huguenard and Prince 1992),
and voltage traces from modeled cortical L4 cells closely
approximated the voltage traces and firing properties of real
regular-spiking neurons (Fig. 1, F and G).

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

2357

Fig. 1. A: model architecture. Independent Poisson inputs are fed into a thalamocortical (TC) neuron (“afferent input”) or a thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN)
neuron (“external input”). The TRN may also receive inputs from a TC cell, then sends a GABAergic input to the TC cell, which projects to a layer 4 (L4) cell.
PFC, prefrontal cortex. B: a real TC cell, recorded from the ventral posterior medial part of the thalamus in current-clamp mode, in response to direct current
injections from Ϫ100 pA to ϩ100 pA. C: the behavior of a model cell in response to the same inputs. D–G: real (D) and model (E) TRN cells and real (F) and
model (G) L4 cells. See text for details.

Baseline model synaptic characteristics. Stimulation of the
TC cell from sensory afferents modeled after a retinogeniculate
synapse with high synaptic efficacy and strong synaptic depression (i.e., a “driver synapse”; Reichova and Sherman 2004)
showed significant rate-dependent effects. Stimulation of afferents at rates of 5 or 10 Hz produced a single postsynaptic
action potential for each incoming action potential. At 20 Hz,

only the initial incoming action potentials are transmitted
through this synapse (Fig. 2A). Similarly, the TC synapse was
modeled as a high-efficacy, high-synaptic depression synapse
and therefore also showed loss of temporal fidelity at synaptic
stimulation rates above 10 Hz (Fig. 2B). A range of different
time constants and magnitudes of synaptic depression for both
of these synapses has been reported in the literature and used

Fig. 2. Illustration of the behavior of the 3 main synapses in this model as they are driven at 5 Hz, 10 Hz and 20 Hz. A: the afferent synapse to the TC is driven
at different rates, showing depression at rates Ͼ 10 Hz. B: the TC-to-L4 synapse is driven at different rates, directly by simulating stimulation of the TC axon,
showing depression at rates Ͼ 10 Hz. C: the TRN-to-TC synapse is driven at different rates, showing hyperpolarization with rebound depolarizations, driven by
T currents, which culminate in rebound spikes at rates above 10 Hz. Note that all y-axes use a 15-mV marker except the bottom 2 nonspiking traces in C, which
have an expanded y-axis to illustrate subthreshold dynamics.
J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

2358

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

in previous modeling studies (Banitt et al. 2007; Bartlett and
Smith 2002; Boudreau and Ferster 2005; Chance et al. 1998;
Chen and Regehr 2003; Chung et al. 2002; Laurent et al. 2002;
Reig et al. 2006; Wehr and Zador 2005), and the impact of
systematically modifying these time constants is explored
below. Stimulation of the TRN-to-TC synapse at low rates
produces a hyperpolarization of the TC cell, followed by a
rebound depolarization without spiking. As the rate of TRN
stimulation is increased, the degree of synaptic depression
became more evident, and the magnitude of the rebound
depolarizing current increases, culminating in a two-spike
rebound burst with stimulation rates of 20 Hz and above
(Fig. 2C).
The impact of incorporation of the TRN, initially in a
closed-loop configuration, was examined to determine whether
our model shows behavior similar to previous modeling studies
(Destexhe et al. 1993, 1996; Steriade et al. 1993a). As expected, in response to a 2-s-long tonic afferent input (modeled
as a train of afferent spikes at 1,000 Hz), the TC and TRN
neurons fire alternately at ϳ11 Hz. The oscillatory firing of the
TC cell elicits rhythmic spikes in the L4 cell. The oscillations
cease at the termination of the stimulus because of the absence
of excitatory drive to the TC cell (Fig. 3).
Behavior of the open-loop network. The behavior of the
open-loop network using independent Poisson-modulated
trains of pulses as inputs to the TC and TRN cells was
examined. In the absence of TRN input (Fig. 4A), Poissonmodulated input at an average rate of 25 Hz produced a spike
train of ϳ3.1 spikes/s in the TC cell and 2.8 spikes/s in the L4
cell. The L4 cell responded to most of the TC spikes with a
spike unless TC spikes came in rapid succession, which were
filtered out by the paired pulse depression built into the TC
synapse model (Fig. 4A). The interspike interval histogram of
the TC cell shows a single peak at ϳ150 ms, with a long tail
of intervals extending out to ϳ900 ms.
When input to the TRN is added, the behavior of the circuit
changes. Figure 4B illustrates the results when the TRN received Poisson-modulated inputs at an average rate of 5 Hz
while the TC cell continued to receive inputs at an average rate
of 25 Hz, in response to an afferent stimulus identical to that
used for the simulation in Fig. 4A. In the presence of inputs to
the TRN, TC cells fire a mixture of individual spikes and bursts
(Fig. 4B). The total spike rate in the TC cell was 5.6 spikes/s,
which is ϳ81% higher than without the TRN, while the total
spike rate of the L4 cell was 4.4 spikes/s, which is ϳ57%
higher than the spike rate without the TRN. It is notable that
bursts are seen infrequently in the TC cell but still produce
substantial enhancement of L4 spiking. In addition, the convergence of postinhibitory depolarizations and direct excitatory

afferent inputs allows several spikes to appear in the L4 cell
that were not apparent without activation of the TRN (Fig. 4B).
Other L4 spikes shifted their timing compared with the original
stimulus without the TRN (Fig. 4B). Similar to in vivo data
from the thalamus of awake subjects (Jeanmonod et al. 1996;
Ramcharan et al. 2000), the interspike interval histogram of the
TC cell shows two peaks: one corresponding to the action
potentials within the bursts (ϳ6 ms) and the other corresponding to action potentials between bursts (ϳ150 ms). These data
suggest that the presence of the TRN in an open-loop configuration may increase TC and L4 total spike output, that this is
accomplished by changing the interval statistics of the TC
spike train, and that the increase in L4 output is not solely
dependent upon TC cell bursting, which is seen very infrequently in this example (ϳ0.5 Hz, compared with a total spike
rate of 5.6 Hz).
Different input rates to both TC and TRN cells were explored, ranging in average rate from 0.5 Hz to 200 Hz, with
rates being logarithmically spaced. All inputs to TC and TRN
cells were Poisson distributed. Without TRN stimulation, both
TC and L4 cells demonstrated incremental increases in firing
rate as the average afferent input rate increased up to ϳ10 Hz,
and at higher rates a decrease in firing rates was observed (first
column in Fig. 5A and black line in Fig. 5B). The drop-off in
spiking with low and high rates is caused by different factors.
With low afferent stimulation rates, the low spiking rates are
related to the small numbers of input pulses provided to these
cells. As the rate of afferent stimulation increased, the spike
outputs increased until synaptic depression diminished postsynaptic firing at each synapse (recovery time constant ␶ ϭ 125
ms for each synapse in the baseline model). At rates Ͼ 10 Hz,
the drop-off in spiking is related to synaptic depression. This
point is made more clear as the value of ␶ is varied at the
afferent and TC synapses (see below).
Particular combinations of input rates to the TRN cell and to
the TC cell produced a maximum total spike output in the L4
cell (Fig. 5A), showing a peak response when the average rates
of input to both the TRN cell and the TC cell were each ϳ10
Hz. The presence of input to the TRN altered the filtering
properties of L4 neurons in complex ways (Fig. 5, B–F). The
bandwidth of the thalamocortical transfer functions measured
at the L4 neuron was ϳ35 Hz. As the rate of input to the TRN
increased, the thalamocortical transfer function initially broadened, with bandwidths approaching 60 Hz at afferent rates
between 5 and 50 Hz, and then narrowed again, with bandwidths returning to ϳ35 Hz at TRN rates of 200 Hz. These data
suggest that the TRN adjusts the tuning properties of the
thalamocortical filter.

Fig. 3. Behavior of the reciprocal model. Tonic input
to the TC cell produces rhythmic spiking at ϳ10 Hz in
the TC cell (red) and the TRN cell (blue) and an onset
response in the L4 neuron (black). Inset, bottom right,
shows higher-resolution view of TC and TRN cell
activity.

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

2359

Fig. 4. Illustration of the impact of the TRN on a TC and a L4 cell while there is concurrent afferent input to the TC cell. A: with no input to the TRN but input
to the TC cell of a 25 Hz-modulated pulse train, the TC cell fires intermittent spikes and drives the L4 cell, with occasional failures at the TC synapse due to
TC synaptic depression (open circle). Interspike interval (ISI) histogram (right) shows a single peak at ϳ150 ms. B: with inclusion of TRN input at 5 Hz and
an external stimulus to TC cells identical to that in A, TC cells show occasional bursts (single asterisk), but mostly individual spikes, leading to a greater total
number of spikes at the L4 cell (double asterisk for spikes seen in the L4 cell seen only when TRN is receiving input). Other L4 spikes shifted their timing relative
to the case prior to engaging the TRN (caret). Interspike interval histograms from the TC cell show 2 peaks, 1 corresponding to the interburst interval at ϳ150
ms and another corresponding to the spikes within the bursts, peaking at ϳ6 ms (shown in inset).

To further examine the impact of the TRN on L4 firing rates,
a normalized spike output matrix was constructed by subtracting the baseline firing rates (without the TRN, which is the first
column of Fig. 5A) from the corresponding firing rates when
the TRN was being stimulated (Fig. 5D). This difference
matrix, shown as a three-dimensional contour plot, illustrates
that most of the TRN-induced enhancement in L4 output was
seen at the highest rates of afferent stimulation, which is due to
recovery from synaptic depression in the TC cell, as shown in
Fig. 4B. The greatest suppression of L4 output, shown as a
negative-going wave with an arrow, is seen at the highest rates
of TRN stimulation. Review of individual filter functions from
Fig. 5D illustrate the rate-dependent enhancement and suppression phenomena more clearly. For example, normalized L4
spiking rates obtained at two different rates of TRN stimulation
(25 and 150 Hz), and at varying rates of afferent input, are
shown in Fig. 5E. At a rate of stimulation of the TRN of 25 Hz,
maximum enhancement in L4 spiking is seen at the highest rates
of afferent stimulation to the TC cell. When the stimulation rate of
the TRN is raised to 150 Hz mostly suppression is seen, and this

suppression is most evident when afferent stimulation to the TC
cell is ϳ20 –30 Hz. When looked at from the reverse perspective,
that is, by holding the rate of afferent stimulation fixed at either 25
or 150 Hz and varying the rate of stimulation of the TRN (Fig.
5F), it becomes clear that the TRN is more likely to enhance L4
spiking when afferent rates are high (150 Hz) and to suppress L4
spiking when afferent rates are intermediate (25 Hz). These data
illustrate the complex interrelationships between the rates of
stimulation of the TRN and the TC cell and the resulting pattern
of spiking at the L4 cell.
To ensure that these findings are not a result of the particular
combination of parameters used from individual neurons, the
simulations were rerun with averaged parameters obtained across
the three cell types (10 of each cell type). These data are illustrated
in Fig. 6 and show that the phenomena of rate-dependent enhancement and suppression are similar when using averaged parameters
and parameters derived from individual cells (compare to Fig. 5,
A and D).
Removal of T-type calcium channels substantially altered
the impact of the TRN on L4 firing. In the absence of T-type

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

2360

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

Fig. 5. Output of L4 cell in response to a range of combinations of inputs to TC and TRN cells ranging from 0.5 Hz to 200 Hz. A: heat map of the raw spike
output in the L4 cell. B: thalamocortical transfer functions with no input to TRN (baseline) compared with 25-Hz input to TRN and 150-Hz input to TRN showing
broadening of the transfer function. C: bandwidth of the thalamocortical transfer function changes as a function of TRN stimulation rate. D: 3-dimensional
contour plot of the difference of spike output relative to the baseline case of no input to the TRN in the L4 cell. Asterisk shows area of maximal enhancement,
and arrow shows area of maximal suppression. E: individual normalized thalamocortical transfer functions obtained at 2 different rates of TRN stimulation (25
and 150 Hz); 25 Hz produces enhancement at high rates of afferent stimulation to the TC cell, while 150 Hz produces depression of L4 spiking. F: individual
traces showing normalized spike output as a function of TRN stimulation rate at 2 different rates of afferent stimulation (25 and 150 Hz).

calcium channels, increasing the rate of TRN stimulation
monotonically reduced the spiking output of the L4 cell (Fig. 7,
A and B). Unlike the changes in bandwidth seen with changing
rates of TRN input in the presence of thalamic T currents seen
in Fig. 5C, removal of T currents produced bandwidths that are
initially flat and then diminish as TRN stimulation rates rise,
primarily because the magnitude of the response at high TRN
rates declines precipitously (Fig. 7C). These data suggest that
TRN-based enhancement of spike output and adjustment of
thalamocortical transfer function tuning are dependent upon
thalamic T-type calcium channels.
Impact of changing synaptic and biophysical parameters.
The effects of changing several synaptic and biophysical properties on the magnitude of TRN-based enhancement in L4
spiking rates were explored. During these parameter changes,
all other biophysical and synaptic properties were held constant. TRN-based enhancement of L4 spiking rates was found
to be highly dependent on the magnitude of the T-type calcium
current (Fig. 8A). Enhancement of L4 output was seen at
T-type channel conductance values as low as 15 nS and
showed a steep increase as the conductance value was increased to 30 nS. Beyond 50 nS, the increase plateaued. In
addition, adjustment of the resting potential of TC and TRN
neurons was done as a way to simulate the presence of
typically depolarizing modulators, such as acetylcholine or
norepinephrine. Mild tonic hyperpolarization of the TC cell
shut down TC spiking by dropping EPSP amplitudes below
spiking thresholds, while tonic depolarization gradually increased TRN-based enhancement of L4 spike output (Fig. 8B).

This increase in enhancement is related to higher tonic spiking
rates in TC neurons, which suppressed L4 spiking and was then
relieved by the intermittent pauses and rebounds induced by
the TRN. L4 spiking output was relatively stable across a broad
range of resting potentials of TRN neurons, although at strong
depolarizations (about ϩ12 mV relative to baseline) TRN
spike rates became quite high and tonically suppressed TC
neurons, diminishing L4 output (Fig. 8B). This suppression
was partially relieved by depolarizing both the TC neuron and
the TRN neuron by ϳ12 mV (Fig. 8B). Changing the recovery
time constant of the afferent input to the TC cell or the TC
synapse from 25 ms to 800 ms did gradually diminish the
magnitude of enhancement seen in the L4 cell (Fig. 8C), and
this drop was more prominent when the TC synapse recovery
time constant was increased. This suggests that synaptic filtering at either synapse is not the sole cause of TRN-based
enhancement of L4 spiking. The strength of synaptic projections from external sources (such as the prefrontal cortex,
amygdala, or nonreciprocal portions of the thalamus) is not yet
known and may vary between these different sources of input.
Therefore we examined the impact of varying the strength of
the external synapse to the TRN from 2 to 256 nS (Fig. 8D). At
low levels of synaptic conductance, there is essentially no
enhancement of L4 firing, related to absence of TRN firing
under these conditions. Above 10 nS, there is a sharp increase
in enhancement, which drops off gradually at higher synaptic
strengths. This latter result is consistent with the overall result
that the degree of TRN-mediated enhancement of TC trans-

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

2361

spikes/s at the highest TRN rates, while they only dropped
by ϳ1 spike/s without the FS cell. Finally, the bandwidths
of the thalamocortical transfer functions were narrower in
the presence of the FS cell, particularly at high rates of TRN
stimulation (Fig. 9F).
Impact of TRN on mutual information. Given previous work
demonstrating the impact of bursting on the information content of thalamic spike trains (Reinagel et al. 1999), we examined the impact of the TRN on the relationship between the
temporal pattern of afferent input to the TC cell and L4
temporal spiking patterns using MI. In the absence of the TRN,
the MI rose with afferent input rate, then peaked at input rates
of ϳ2 Hz, and then declined (Fig. 10A). This initial rise was
likely related to the increasing number of L4 spikes produced
as the number of input pulses grew, because normalizing by the
number of L4 spikes produced an essentially a monotonic
decreasing amount of MI as the afferent rate increased (Fig.
10B). In addition, normalizing by number of spikes virtually
equalized the MI (expressed as bits/spike) across different
simulation durations (Fig. 10B). At afferent stimulation rates
above 2 Hz, MI diminished, related to diminishing correspondence between input and output because of adaptation.
Inclusion of the TRN had different effects on MI depending
on the rate of afferent input to the TC cell. Using a value of
normalized MI (normalized to number of spikes) expressed
relative to the maximum MI at a particular afferent stimulation
rate, the TRN caused a prominent drop in MI at TRN stimulation rates between 5 and 20 Hz and a recovery of MI above
20 Hz (Fig. 10, C and D). As TRN stimulation rate increased,
this pattern appeared to invert, such that at high rates of
afferent stimulation TRN stimulation rates in the 1–20 Hz
range boosted MI quite considerably, then declined again at
higher rates of TRN stimulation (Fig. 10, C and D). Note that
these changes cannot simply be spike rate dependent since
these MI values have been normalized for L4 spike rate.
DISCUSSION
Fig. 6. Output of L4 cell in response to a range of combinations of inputs to TC
and TRN cells ranging from 0.5 Hz to 200 Hz, using the averaged parameters
shown in Table 2. A: heat map of the raw spike output in the L4 cell. B:
3-dimensional contour plot of the difference of spike output relative to the
baseline case of no input to the TRN in the L4 cell.

mission is maximal at intermediate rates of activation of TRN
neurons (as illustrated in Fig. 5F).
Impact of FS interneurons. TC neurons are known to make
strong synapses on FS interneurons, which then provide
GABAergic innervation to L4 regular-spiking neurons (Cruikshank et al. 2007; Sun et al. 2006). We therefore examined the
impact of including an FS interneuron interposed between the
TC cell and the L4 cell (see Fig. 9A for model architecture and
Fig. 9, B and C, for the real and modeled FS cells, respectively). The general pattern of raw spike counts in the presence
of the FS cell is generally similar to that without the FS cell
(compare Fig. 9D to Fig. 5A). Two differences are that 1) the
overall spike counts are slightly diminished in the presence of
the FS cell and 2) the highest rates of TRN stimulation produce
less enhancement than in the model without the FS cell
(compare circled area in Fig. 9D to similar region in Fig. 5A).
This is most evident when looking at the normalized spike
output (Fig. 9E), where spike rates diminish by nearly 3

In the present study, we found that model circuits that
contain nonreciprocal TRN-TC connectivity can potentiate
ascending signals as they pass through the thalamus. In addition, this potentiation is only seen for a restricted range of rates
of stimulation of TC and TRN cells; suppression is seen at
others. This suggests that the TRN, when placed in an openloop configuration with the dorsal thalamus, can act to create a
tunable temporal filter such that only particular rates of ascending information activate the cortex. In addition, this filtering
capacity disappeared when T-type calcium channels were
removed, suggesting that the filtering was dependent on the
activation of these channels. Finally, when this model was
reconfigured into a closed-loop organization, oscillatory
activity at similar rates seen in spindles was observed,
which is similar to many previous modeling studies. This
final point suggests that the only fundamental difference
between the present model and previous models is the
connectivity of the dorsal thalamus and TRN cells. These
data highlight the considerable importance of knowing the
microarchitecture of TRN-thalamic circuitry to make inferences about larger-scale network activity.
Methodological issues. The models in the present study are,
by design, extremely simple and do not capture the wealth of

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

2362

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

Fig. 7. Impact of removal of the T current on model behavior. Removal of the T currents diminishes all enhancement of firing seen both in the raw spike output
(A) and the normalized spike output (B). The bandwidth of the thalamocortical transfer functions also decreases as a function of rate of TRN stimulation, related
to the low overall spike counts at high TRN rates (C).

biophysical detail present in real TC, TRN, or L4 cortical
thalamorecipient cells. One particular issue that may benefit
from a more biophysically detailed model is the presence of
T-type calcium channels on dendrites (Crandall et al. 2010).
An assumption of the present model is that ascending sensory
inputs and TRN inputs are integrated at the same location,
although it is certainly possible that these inputs may be
physically separated to different parts of the dendritic tree or to
different dendrites, producing local dendritic integration. Other
details have also been left out, such as cross-channel interactions in the dorsal thalamus, potentially mediated by the TRN
(Crabtree and Isaac 2002; Deschênes et al. 1985; Landisman et
al. 2002; Pinault and Deschênes 1998). Furthermore, there are
other sources of GABAergic input onto sensory TC cells:
intrinsic GABAergic interneurons (Sherman 2004), inhibition
from the zona incerta (Barthó et al. 2002), or, in the case of the
auditory and visual systems, ascending inhibition from the
midbrain (Cucchiaro et al. 1991; Llano et al. 2014; Peruzzi et
al. 1997; Venkataraman and Bartlett 2013; Winer et al. 1996).
Additionally, it is not known whether such TRN-based enhancement of cortical activation would be modified by other
inputs to the TRN, such as those from layer 6 of the cortex (Liu
and Jones 1999). It is well recognized that corticothalamic
projections can have dominant roles in the firing of thalamic
neurons (Alitto and Usrey 2003; Sillito et al. 2006; Suga and
Ma 2003) and that these roles may vary dynamically (Crandall
et al. 2015). Since our goal was to examine the potential for the
reticulothalamic pathway to modify signals ascending through
the thalamus, we have not included these projections, although
they may be incorporated in future simulations. In addition,
excitatory synapses in this model were all relatively generic,
most closely resembling AMPA-type receptors, although it is
known that NMDA receptors are present on multiple modeled
synapses (Funke et al. 1991; Gentet and Ulrich 2004; Gil and
Amitai 1996). The impact of inclusion of NMDA currents in
the present model is not yet known: enhancement of TC firing
may have been seen with high afferent rates, but this may be
offset by TC synaptic filtering. A dedicated exploration of the
impact of NMDA currents would require systematic exploration of their impact at multiple synapses, and may easily be
incorporated in future studies. Finally, L4 cells receive a
number of thalamic inputs (Alonso et al. 2001; Miller et al.
2001), and synchronous firing in multiple thalamic cells may

be required to produce a postsynaptic response (Bruno and
Sakmann 2006). Therefore, the impact of a TRN impulse on
the likelihood that an L4 neuron would fire may be dependent
on TRN effects on a population of TC neurons, not just one
neuron as presently modeled.
Three points should be made with respect to the validity of
using the simple models used in the present study to infer
network dynamics. First, all of the physiological parameters
used to construct this model were obtained from recordings
made at the soma, such that these values were obtained after
dendritic filtering took place. Second, simple single-compartment models have been used successfully to gain insight into
neural network properties, despite drastic simplifications made
for the sake of tractability (Ching et al. 2010; Destexhe et al.
1993; Grillner et al. 1988). Third, now that the core behavior of
this simple network has been characterized in silico, it would
be straightforward to incorporate more components to the
model, such as dendritic currents, cross-channel integration,

Fig. 8. Assessment of the impact of adjustment of T-current magnitude (A), TC
and TRN cell resting membrane potential relative to the resting potential in the
baseline model (B), afferent and TC synaptic recovery time constant (C), and
strength of external synapse to TRN (D). Output is expressed as maximum
spikes per second above baseline (i.e., compared with spike output at same TC
stimulation rate without input to the TRN cell).

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

2363

Fig. 9. Assessment of the impact of incorporation of a fast-spiking (FS cell). A: model architecture with FS cell interposed between a TC and a L4 cell. B and
C: a real (B) and a model (C) FS cell. D: heat map of raw spike output at various rates of afferent and TRN stimulation showing a peak of spike outputs at TRN
rates about 10 Hz and afferent rates of between 10 and 40 Hz. Circle denotes area that shows substantially less spiking than the case without the FS cell (compare
to Fig. 5A). E: 3-dimensional contour plot showing normalized spike outputs with varying rates of afferent and TRN input. F: bandwidths of thalamocortical
transfer functions in the baseline model (without the FS cell) compared with the model with the FS cell.

other forms of GABAergic input, etc., and assess their impact
on model performance.
Comparison with physiological data. The present results are
consistent with previous data showing the enhanced efficacy,
in terms of spiking at the level of the cortex (Swadlow and
Gusev 2001), detection of sensory signals (Guido et al. 1995)
and information content (Reinagel et al. 1999) of thalamic
neurons in burst mode. The present results also indicate that the
impact of TRN modulation on both cortical spiking and MI
between afferent input to the TC cell and spiking in an L4 cell
is strongly dependent on the rate of stimulation of the afferent
synapse to the TC neuron. For example, Fig. 5, D and F, show
that potentiation of L4 activation is seen primarily only at high
(Ͼ20 Hz) rates of afferent input and that at intermediate rates
depression is seen. Similarly, TRN-based enhancement of MI
is diminished at low afferent rates but enhanced at high afferent
stimulation rates, and these changes are seen only at intermediate rates of TRN stimulation (Fig. 10, C and D). Afferent
inputs to the traditional sensory parts of the thalamus, such as
the lateral geniculate nucleus, medial geniculate body, and
ventral posterior nucleus, are derived from the retina, inferior
colliculus, and medial lemniscus/spinothalamic system, respectively. The rates of firing of thalamic-projecting neurons in
these systems are highly variable, depending on the stimuli
being encoded and the subsets of afferent neurons being
activated, and encompass the ranges used in this study (Alitto
and Usrey 2008; Davidson et al. 2007; Hubel 1960; Rose et al.
1963; Sincich et al. 2007). Given this heterogeneity of temporal patterns of afferent input to the thalamus, the present data
suggest that the TRN may produce diverse effects on thalamo-

cortical networks that strongly depend on both stimulus features as well as the spiking properties of the individual afferent
projections to TC neurons.
TRN-mediated thalamocortical potentiation was sensitive to
some synaptic and cellular parameters and not others. For
example, adjustment of the strength of the T current strongly
modulated the degree of potentiation as well as the bandwidth
of the thalamocortical transfer function (Fig. 7 and Fig. 8A).
Potentiation was seen at all T-current values above 15 nS,
which encompasses T currents used across several different
computational modeling studies (Deleuze et al. 2012; Destexhe
et al. 1993; Pospischil et al. 2008; Wang 1994), suggesting that
TRN-based enhancement of TC firing seen here is not due to
selection of an artificially high value of the T current. Potentiation was also strongly diminished with increases in the
afferent and TC synaptic recovery time constants. This is
because high values of this time constant are suppressive for
virtually all thalamic inputs. At low values of these time
constants, the L4 cell tracks, spike for spike, the activity of the
TC neuron. These findings, coupled with previous work showing that the degree of TC filtering can be altered by a host of
different modulators and/or local network activity (Gil et al.
1997; Hirata and Castro-Alamancos 2006; Reig et al. 2006),
suggest that the TC synapse may be an important point of
regulation to control the response of the cortex to temporally
patterned input delivered to the thalamus. Output of the L4 cell
was not strongly dependent on the resting potential of the TC
or TRN cell, although decreases in the degree of TRN-based
enhancement of L4 spiking were seen with hyperpolarization
of TC neurons or strong depolarization of TRN neurons (Fig.

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

2364

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

Fig. 10. Impact of the TRN on mutual information (MI). A: the MI between the afferent train to
the TC cell and the L4 spike train increases, then
decreases, as the input rate to the TC cell increases and increases as the length of the simulation increases. B: dividing the MI by the number of spikes in the output cell causes MI to
become a monotonic decreasing function with
input rate and equalizes MI across the different
lengths of simulation. C: across a range of rates
of input to the TC and TRN cell, the normalized
relative MI shows a complex relationship with
input rates. D: at low rates of afferent stimulation, TRN stimulation causes a drop in MI at low
TRN rates, then a recovery of MI at higher rates.
At high rates of afferent stimulation, TRN stimulation at low rates causes an increase in MI,
which then decreases at high rates of TRN
stimulation.

8B). Interestingly, the depression of L4 enhancement seen with
depolarization of TRN neurons was partially recovered by also
depolarizing the TC cell (Fig. 8B). This finding indicates that
matched depolarizing input to TRN and TC neurons (such as
that coming from brain stem cholinergic systems during increases in arousal) suggests that the impact of the TRN on
thalamocortical activation may not be particularly state
dependent.
The stimulus design needs to be considered in the interpretation of the present results. Uncorrelated Poisson-modulated
pulse trains were used as simple approximations to random
inputs received by the TRN and TC neuron, although it is
known that many spike trains violate Poisson assumptions (Liu
et al. 2001). The presence of uncorrelated inputs has implications in the MI data. For example, while it is not surprising that
the addition of a source of noise, in the form of uncorrelated
inputs from the TRN to the TC cell, can diminish the correspondence between the afferent input and the L4 neuron and
thus diminish the MI, this drop in MI is only seen at particular
combinations of rates of input to the TC and TRN cells. At
high rates of input to the TC cell, the TRN causes substantial
increases in the MI (see Fig. 10D) that cannot simply be due to
an increase in L4 spiking, since MI was normalized for spike
output. In this sense, the TRN can facilitate MI in a manner
similar to what has been observed with stochastic resonance in
other neural systems (Hänggi 2002; Stacey and Durand 2000).
It is not yet known with any precision what kinds of signals are
sent to the TRN from remote regions, such as the overlying
cortex, prefrontal cortex, amygdala, or basal forebrain, but it is
not likely that the TRN simply acts as a source of noise, since
TRN spiking activity in vivo is highly correlated to sensory
inputs or motor outputs (Marlinski and Beloozerova 2014;
McAlonan et al. 2006; Shosaku and Sumitomo 1983; Yu et al.
2009). Future work with this model, incorporating more real-

istic inputs to the TRN, will be feasible once neuronal recordings in vivo from identified inputs to the TRN are available.
Bursting, inhibition, and TC coding. The idea that bursting
in TC neurons may be an important form of coding information
is controversial. Indeed, there is a body of literature that would
suggest that bursting is seen in states of global inattention and
therefore suppresses the flow of information through the thalamus. This literature is based primarily on the findings that
thalamic neurons tend to hyperpolarize during sleep or drowsiness and often burst rhythmically during these states (Bereshpolova et al. 2011; Hirsch et al. 1983; Livingstone and Hubel
1981; Steriade et al. 1993b). In addition, thalamic bursting is
seen during absence seizures, a state in which the organism is
awake but inattentive to external stimuli (von Krosigk et al.
1993). This has led to the most common description of thalamic function, that of being a relay, which is gated based on
overall states of arousal. More specifically, during drowsiness
or sleep there is a decrease in activity of monaminergic
afferents from the brain stem, which permits hyperpolarization
of the thalamus and therefore blocks relay of information to the
cortex. Then, during states of arousal, TC neurons become
depolarized from the action of monoaminergic brain stem
afferents and the neurons switch from burst to tonic mode and
relay information with high fidelity to the cortex.
Unfortunately, this simple model of thalamic function does
not account for other findings in the literature, such as the
presence of bursting seen in awake animals (Fanselow et al.
2001; Guido and Weyand 1995; Ramcharan et al. 2005). In
addition, several groups have found that bursts can selectively
encode sensory features. For example, bursting in visual thalamic neurons robustly encodes certain types of temporal
sequences, such as the movement of an object into the visual
field (Lesica et al. 2006; Lesica and Stanley 2004). Other
studies demonstrate that viewing naturalistic movies will induce hyperpolarizations that transition visual thalamic cells to

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

burst mode (Wang et al. 2007). Finally, it has been shown that
bursting in visual thalamic cells is driven by specific patterns of
stimulation and is a highly reliable form of signaling (Alitto et
al. 2005). These data, combined with the temporal filtering
characteristics of the TC synapse (Chung et al. 2002; Gil et al.
1999; Stratford et al. 1996) that provide a cortical “readout”
mechanism that favors bursts, suggest that bursting not only
may be a viable mode of coding but also may be more potent
than tonic spikes in activating the cortex. Finally, it is important to note that, similar to the findings of others (Deleuze et al.
2012), fully elaborated bursts were not necessary to produce
enhanced cortical responses; rebound T current-mediated depolarizations carrying one or two spikes were sufficient to
produce enhanced cortical activation (Fig. 4B, center, TC
trace). Patterns of thalamic firing potentiated by T currents, but
not showing bursting, would be difficult to detect with traditional means of identifying bursts in the extracellular record
(Lu et al. 1992; Ramcharan et al. 2000) but would change the
statistical properties of the thalamic spike train (Fig. 4B, right).
Therefore, the present findings, coupled with previous work
demonstrating the presence of nonperiodic bursting during the
awake state, suggest that a more nuanced view of the thalamus
and bursting may be appropriate. Although spontaneous, rhythmic bursting may be associated with states of global inattention, irregular bursting may, in fact, be a mechanism by which
detection of weak signals is facilitated. This implies that
modulatory inputs from remote regions such as the basal
forebrain, amygdala, and prefrontal cortex can alter the activation of a particular region of the cortex by dynamically
modulating the state of TC neurons during wakefulness. The
fact that such low-threshold detection does not appear to occur
during sleep may be due to a whole host of sleep-specific
factors, for example, cortical unresponsiveness during slowwave oscillations (Watson et al. 2008) or withdrawal of monoamine neuromodulators that may hyperpolarize thalamic cells
to the point that they are unable to respond to external inputs
(Livingstone and Hubel 1981). Whereas substantial advances
were made in the past in understanding closed-loop TRNthalamus interactions with reduced experimental preparations
that retained only thalamus-TRN connectivity (von Krosigk et
al. 1993), the results presented here suggest that more complicated dynamics are invoked once afferent inputs to the thalamus are stimulated concurrently with the TRN. Therefore, in
future studies it will be necessary to test the hypotheses
advanced here with experimental preparations that contain a
greater degree of intact circuitry between TRN, thalamus, and
afferent inputs to the thalamus, either in a slice preparation
(Llano et al. 2014) or with in vivo approaches that allow
excitation of the TRN while monitoring an animal’s behavioral
state (Halassa et al. 2011).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dr. Kush Paul for his assistance in identifying fastspiking interneurons in our data set.
GRANTS
D. A. Llano was supported by National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders (NIDCD) Grant DC-012125, and B. J. Slater was
supported by NIDCD Grant DC-013501.
The view(s) expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not reflect
the official policy or position of Brooke Army Medical Center, the U.S. Army

2365

Medical Department, the U.S. Army Office of the Surgeon General, the
Department of the Air Force, the Department of the Army or the Department
of Defense or the U.S. Government.
DISCLOSURES
No conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the author(s).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Author contributions: A.M.W., E.D.G., and D.A.L. conception and design
of research; A.M.W., B.J.S., E.D.G., and D.A.L. performed experiments;
A.M.W., B.J.S., E.D.G., and D.A.L. analyzed data; A.M.W., B.J.S., E.D.G.,
and D.A.L. interpreted results of experiments; A.M.W. and D.A.L. prepared
figures; A.M.W., B.J.S., E.D.G., and D.A.L. drafted manuscript; A.M.W.,
E.D.G., and D.A.L. edited and revised manuscript; A.M.W., B.J.S., E.D.G.,
and D.A.L. approved final version of manuscript.
REFERENCES
Alitto HJ, Usrey WM. Corticothalamic feedback and sensory processing.
Curr Opin Neurobiol 13: 440 – 445, 2003.
Alitto HJ, Usrey WM. Origin and dynamics of extraclassical suppression in
the lateral geniculate nucleus of the macaque monkey. Neuron 57: 135–146,
2008.
Alitto HJ, Weyand TG, Usrey WM. Distinct properties of stimulus-evoked
bursts in the lateral geniculate nucleus. J Neurosci 25: 514 –523, 2005.
Alonso JM, Usrey WM, Reid RC. Rules of connectivity between geniculate
cells and simple cells in cat primary visual cortex. J Neurosci 21: 4002–
4015, 2001.
Asanuma C, Porter LL. Light and electron microscopic evidence for a
GABAergic projection from the caudal basal forebrain to the thalamic
reticular nucleus in rats. J Comp Neurol 302: 159 –172, 1990.
Banitt Y, Martin KA, Segev I. A biologically realistic model of contrast
invariant orientation tuning by thalamocortical synaptic depression. J Neurosci 27: 10230 –10239, 2007.
Barthó P, Freund TF, Acsády L. Selective GABAergic innervation of
thalamic nuclei from zona incerta. Eur J Neurosci 16: 999 –1014, 2002.
Bartlett EL, Smith PH. Effects of paired-pulse and repetitive stimulation on
neurons in the rat medial geniculate body. Neuroscience 113: 957–974,
2002.
Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, Sejnowski TJ. Model of thalamocortical slow-wave sleep oscillations and transitions to activated states. J
Neurosci 22: 8691– 8704, 2002.
Bereshpolova Y, Stoelzel CR, Zhuang J, Amitai Y, Alonso JM, Swadlow
HA. Getting drowsy? Alert/nonalert transitions and visual thalamocortical
network dynamics. J Neurosci 31: 17480 –17487, 2011.
Bickford ME, Günlük AE, van Horn SC, Sherman SM. GABAergic
projection from the basal forebrain to the visual sector of the thalamic
reticular nucleus in the cat. J Comp Neurol 348: 481–510, 1994.
Boudreau CE, Ferster D. Short-term depression in thalamocortical synapses
of cat primary visual cortex. J Neurosci 25: 7179 –7190, 2005.
Bruno RM, Sakmann B. Cortex is driven by weak but synchronously active
thalamocortical synapses. Science 312: 1622–1627, 2006.
Cellucci C, Albano AM, Rapp P. Statistical validation of mutual information
calculations: comparison of alternative numerical algorithms. Phys Rev E
71: 066208, 2005.
Chance FS, Nelson SB, Abbott LF. Synaptic depression and the temporal
response characteristics of V1 cells. J Neurosci 18: 4785– 4799, 1998.
Chen C, Regehr WG. Presynaptic modulation of the retinogeniculate synapse.
J Neurosci 23: 3130 –3135, 2003.
Ching S, Cimenser A, Purdon PL, Brown EN, Kopell NJ. Thalamocortical
model for a propofol-induced ␣-rhythm associated with loss of consciousness. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107: 22665–22670, 2010.
Chung S, Li X, Nelson SB. Short-term depression at thalamocortical synapses
contributes to rapid adaptation of cortical sensory responses in vivo. Neuron
34: 437– 446, 2002.
Crabtree JW, Isaac JT. New intrathalamic pathways allowing modalityrelated and cross-modality switching in the dorsal thalamus. J Neurosci 22:
8754 – 8761, 2002.
Crandall SR, Cruikshank SJ, Connors BW. A corticothalamic switch:
controlling the thalamus with dynamic synapses. Neuron 86: 768 –782,
2015.

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

2366

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL

Crandall SR, Govindaiah G, Cox CL. Low-threshold Ca2ϩ current amplifies
distal dendritic signaling in thalamic reticular neurons. J Neurosci 30:
15419 –15429, 2010.
Crick F. Function of the thalamic reticular complex: the searchlight hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 81: 4586 – 4590, 1984.
Cruikshank SJ, Lewis TJ, Connors BW. Synaptic basis for intense thalamocortical activation of feedforward inhibitory cells in neocortex. Nat Neurosci
10: 462– 468, 2007.
Cucchiaro JB, Bickford ME, Sherman SM. A GABAergic projection from
the pretectum to the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus in the cat. Neuroscience 41: 213–226, 1991.
Darbellay GA, Vajda I. Estimation of the information by an adaptive
partitioning of the observation space. IEEE Trans Inf Theory 45: 1315–
1321, 1999.
Davidson S, Zhang X, Yoon CH, Khasabov SG, Simone DA, Giesler GJ.
The itch-producing agents histamine and cowhage activate separate populations of primate spinothalamic tract neurons. J Neurosci 27: 10007–10014,
2007.
Deleuze C, David F, Béhuret S, Sadoc G, Shin HS, Uebele VN, Renger JJ,
Lambert RC, Leresche N, Bal T. T-type calcium channels consolidate
tonic action potential output of thalamic neurons to neocortex. J Neurosci
32: 12228 –12236, 2012.
Denning KS, Reinagel P. Visual control of burst priming in the anesthetized
lateral geniculate nucleus. J Neurosci 25: 3531–3538, 2005.
Deschênes M, Madariaga-Domich A, Steriade M. Dendrodendritic synapses
in the cat reticularis thalami nucleus: a structural basis for thalamic spindle
synchronization. Brain Res 334: 165–168, 1985.
Destexhe A, Bal T, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ. Ionic mechanisms
underlying synchronized oscillations and propagating waves in a model of
ferret thalamic slices. J Neurophysiol 76: 2049 –2070, 1996.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M. A model of spindle
rhythmicity in the isolated thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurophysiol 72:
803– 818, 1994.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Steriade M. Mechanisms underlying the synchronizing action of corticothalamic feedback through inhibition of thalamic
relay cells. J Neurophysiol 79: 999 –1016, 1998.
Destexhe A, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ. A model for 8 –10 Hz spindling
in interconnected thalamic relay and reticularis neurons. Biophys J 65:
2473–2477, 1993.
Destexhe A, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ. Thalamic and thalamocortical
mechanisms underlying 3 Hz spike-and-wave discharges. Prog Brain Res
121: 289 –307, 1999.
Fanselow EE, Sameshima K, Baccala LA, Nicolelis MA. Thalamic bursting
in rats during different awake behavioral states. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:
15330 –15335, 2001.
Funke K, Eysel UT, FitzGibbon T. Retinogeniculate transmission by NMDA
and non-NMDA receptors in the cat. Brain Res 547: 229 –238, 1991.
Gentet LJ, Ulrich D. Strong, reliable and precise synaptic connections
between thalamic relay cells and neurones of the nucleus reticularis in
juvenile rats. J Physiol 546: 801– 811, 2003.
Gentet L, Ulrich D. Electrophysiological characterization of synaptic connections between layer VI cortical cells and neurons of the nucleus reticularis
thalami in juvenile rats. Eur J Neurosci 19: 625– 633, 2004.
Gil Z, Amitai Y. Adult thalamocortical transmission involves both NMDA
and non-NMDA receptors. J Neurophysiol 76: 2547–2554, 1996.
Gil Z, Connors BW, Amitai Y. Differential regulation of neocortical synapses
by neuromodulators and activity. Neuron 19: 679 – 686, 1997.
Gil Z, Connors BW, Amitai Y. Efficacy of thalamocortical and intracortical
synaptic connections: quanta, innervation, and reliability. Neuron 23: 385–
397, 1999.
Goense J, Ratnam R, Nelson ME. Burst firing improves the detection of
weak signals in spike trains. Neurocomputing 52: 103–108, 2003.
Grillner S, Buchanan JT, Lansner A. Simulation of the segmental burst
generating network for locomotion in lamprey. Neurosci Lett 89: 31–35,
1988.
Guido W, Lu SM, Vaughan J, Godwin DW, Sherman SM. Receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) analysis of neurons in the cat’s lateral
geniculate nucleus during tonic and burst response mode. Vis Neurosci 12:
723–741, 1995.
Guido W, Weyand T. Burst responses in thalamic relay cells of the awake
behaving cat. J Neurophysiol 74: 1782–1786, 1995.
Guillery RW, Feig SL, Lozsádi DA. Paying attention to the thalamic reticular
nucleus. Trends Neurosci 21: 28 –32, 1998.

Halassa MM, Chen Z, Wimmer RD, Brunetti PM, Zhao S, Zikopoulos B,
Wang F, Brown EN, Wilson MA. State-dependent architecture of thalamic
reticular subnetworks. Cell 158: 808 – 821, 2014.
Halassa MM, Siegle JH, Ritt JT, Ting JT, Feng G, Moore CI. Selective
optical drive of thalamic reticular nucleus generates thalamic bursts and
cortical spindles. Nat Neurosci 14: 1118 –1120, 2011.
Hänggi P. Stochastic resonance in biology. How noise can enhance detection
of weak signals and help improve biological information processing. Chem
Phys Chem 3: 285–290, 2002.
Hirata A, Castro-Alamancos MA. Relief of synaptic depression produces
long-term enhancement in thalamocortical networks. J Neurophysiol 95:
2479 –2491, 2006.
Hirsch JC, Fourment A, Marc ME. Sleep-related variations of membrane
potential in the lateral geniculate body relay neurons of the cat. Brain Res
259: 308 –312, 1983.
Hubel DH. Single unit activity in lateral geniculate body and optic tract of
unrestrained cats. J Physiol 150: 91–104, 1960.
Huguenard J, Prince D. A novel T-type current underlies prolonged Ca2ϩdependent burst firing in GABAergic neurons of rat thalamic reticular
nucleus. J Neurosci 12: 3804 –3817, 1992.
Huguenard JR. Neuronal circuitry of thalamocortical epilepsy and mechanisms of antiabsence drug action. Adv Neurol 79: 991–999, 1998.
Jahnsen H, Llinas R. Electrophysiological properties of guinea-pig thalamic
neurones: an in vitro study. J Physiol 349: 205–226, 1984.
Jeanmonod D, Magnin M, Morel A. Low-threshold calcium spike bursts in
the human thalamus. Common physiopathology for sensory, motor and
limbic positive symptoms. Brain 119: 363–375, 1996.
Jones EG. The Thalamus. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007.
Kao CQ, Coulter DA. Physiology and pharmacology of corticothalamic
stimulation-evoked responses in rat somatosensory thalamic neurons in
vitro. J Neurophysiol 77: 2661–2676, 1997.
Kimura A. Diverse subthreshold cross-modal sensory interactions in the
thalamic reticular nucleus: implications for new pathways of cross-modal
attentional gating function. Eur J Neurosci 39: 1405–1418, 2014.
Kimura A, Imbe H, Donishi T, Tamai Y. Axonal projections of single
auditory neurons in the thalamic reticular nucleus: implications for tonotopy-related gating function and cross-modal modulation. Eur J Neurosci
26: 3524 –3535, 2007.
Krahe R, Gabbiani F. Burst firing in sensory systems. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:
13–23, 2004.
Landisman CE, Long MA, Beierlein M, Deans MR, Paul DL, Connors
BW. Electrical synapses in the thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurosci 22:
1002–1009, 2002.
Laurent A, Goaillard JM, Cases O, Lebrand C, Gaspar P, Ropert N.
Activity-dependent presynaptic effect of serotonin 1B receptors on the
somatosensory thalamocortical transmission in neonatal mice. J Neurosci
22: 886 –900, 2002.
Lesica NA, Stanley GB. Encoding of natural scene movies by tonic and burst
spikes in the lateral geniculate nucleus. J Neurosci 24: 10731–10740, 2004.
Lesica NA, Weng C, Jin J, Yeh CI, Alonso JM, Stanley GB. Dynamic
encoding of natural luminance sequences by LGN Bursts. PLoS Biol 4:
e209, 2006.
Lisman JE. Bursts as a unit of neural information: making unreliable synapses
reliable. Trends Neurosci 20: 38 – 43, 1997.
Liu RC, Tzonev S, Rebrik S, Miller KD. Variability and information in a
neural code of the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. J Neurophysiol 86:
2789 –2806, 2001.
Liu XB, Jones EG. Predominance of corticothalamic synaptic inputs to
thalamic reticular nucleus neurons in the rat. J Comp Neurol 414: 67–79,
1999.
Livingstone M, Hubel DH. Effects of sleep and arousal on the processing of
visual information in the cat. Nature 291: 554 –561, 1981.
Llano DA, Slater BJ, Lesicko AM, Stebbings KA. An auditory colliculothalamocortical brain slice preparation in mouse. J Neurophysiol 111:
197–207, 2014.
Llinás RR, Paré D. Of dreaming and wakefulness. Neuroscience 44: 521–535,
1991.
Lu SM, Guido W, Sherman SM. Effects of membrane voltage on receptive
field properties of lateral geniculate neurons in the cat: contributions of the
low-threshold Ca2ϩ conductance. J Neurophysiol 68: 2185, 1992.
Lüthi A, McCormick DA. H-current: properties of a neuronal and network
pacemaker. Neuron 21: 9 –12, 1998.
Marek T, Tichavsky P. On the estimation of mutual information. In: Proceedings of ROBUST. Prague: JCMF, 2008.

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

OPEN-LOOP THALAMIC-TRN COMPUTATIONAL MODEL
Marlinski V, Beloozerova IN. Burst firing of neurons in the thalamic reticular
nucleus during locomotion. J Neurophysiol 112: 181–192, 2014.
McAlonan K, Cavanaugh J, Wurtz RH. Attentional modulation of thalamic
reticular neurons. J Neurosci 26: 4444 – 4450, 2006.
McAlonan K, Cavanaugh J, Wurtz RH. Guarding the gateway to cortex with
attention in visual thalamus. Nature 456: 391–394, 2008.
McCormick DA, Contreras D. On the cellular and network bases of epileptic
seizures. Annu Rev Physiol 63: 815– 846, 2001.
Miller LM, Escabi MA, Read HL, Schreiner CE. Functional convergence of
response properties in the auditory thalamocortical system. Neuron 32:
151–160, 2001.
Moore JW, Ramon F. On numerical integration of the Hodgkin and Huxley
equations for a membrane action potential. J Theor Biol 45: 249 –273, 1974.
Mukherjee P, Kaplan E. Dynamics of neurons in the cat lateral geniculate
nucleus: in vivo electrophysiology and computational modeling. J Neurophysiol 74: 1222–1243, 1995.
Nelder JA, Mead R. A simplex method for function minimization. Comput J
7: 308 –313, 1965.
Ortuño T, Grieve KL, Cao R, Cudeiro J, Rivadulla C. Bursting thalamic
responses in awake monkey contribute to visual detection and are modulated
by corticofugal feedback. Front Behav Neurosci 8: 198, 2014.
Person AL, Perkel DJ. Unitary IPSPs drive precise thalamic spiking in a
circuit required for learning. Neuron 46: 129 –140, 2005.
Peruzzi D, Bartlett E, Smith PH, Oliver DL. A monosynaptic GABAergic
input from the inferior colliculus to the medial geniculate body in rat. J
Neurosci 17: 3766 –3777, 1997.
Pinault D. The thalamic reticular nucleus: structure, function and concept.
Brain Res Rev 46: 1–31, 2004.
Pinault D, Deschênes M. Anatomical evidence for a mechanism of lateral
inhibition in the rat thalamus. Eur J Neurosci 10: 3462–3469, 1998.
Pita-Almenar JD, Yu D, Lu HC, Beierlein M. Mechanisms underlying
desynchronization of cholinergic-evoked thalamic network activity. J Neurosci 34: 14463–14474, 2014.
Pospischil M, Toledo-Rodriguez M, Monier C, Piwkowska Z, Bal T,
Frégnac Y, Markram H, Destexhe A. Minimal Hodgkin-Huxley type
models for different classes of cortical and thalamic neurons. Biol Cybern
99: 427– 441, 2008.
Ramcharan EJ, Gnadt JW, Sherman SM. Burst and tonic firing in thalamic
cells of unanesthetized, behaving monkeys. Vis Neurosci 17: 55– 62, 2000.
Ramcharan EJ, Gnadt JW, Sherman SM. Higher-order thalamic relays
burst more than first-order relays. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102: 12236 –
12241, 2005.
Reichova I, Sherman SM. Somatosensory corticothalamic projections: distinguishing drivers from modulators. J Neurophysiol 92: 2185–2197, 2004.
Reig R, Gallego R, Nowak LG, Sanchez-Vives MV. Impact of cortical
network activity on short-term synaptic depression. Cereb Cortex 16:
688 – 695, 2006.
Reinagel P, Godwin D, Sherman SM, Koch C. Encoding of visual information by LGN bursts. J Neurophysiol 81: 2558 –2569, 1999.
Rose JE, Greenwood DD, Goldberg JM, Hind JE. Some discharge characteristics of single neurons in the inferior colliculus of the cat. I. Tonotopical
organization, relation of spike-counts to tone intensity, and firing patterns of
single elements. J Neurophysiol 26: 294 –320, 1963.
Sherman SM. Tonic and burst firing: dual modes of thalamocortical relay.
Trends Neurosci 24: 122–126, 2001.
Sherman SM. Interneurons and triadic circuitry of the thalamus. Trends
Neurosci 27: 670 – 675, 2004.
Shosaku A, Sumitomo I. Auditory neurons in the rat thalamic reticular
nucleus. Exp Brain Res 49: 432– 442, 1983.
Sillito AM, Cudeiro J, Jones HE. Always returning: feedback and sensory
processing in visual cortex and thalamus. Trends Neurosci 29: 307–316,
2006.
Sincich LC, Adams DL, Economides JR, Horton JC. Transmission of spike
trains at the retinogeniculate synapse. J Neurosci 27: 2683–2692, 2007.
Smith GD, Cox CL, Sherman SM, Rinzel J. Fourier analysis of sinusoidally
driven thalamocortical relay neurons and a minimal integrate-and-fire-orburst model. J Neurophysiol 83: 588 – 610, 2000.

2367

Stacey WC, Durand DM. Stochastic resonance improves signal detection in
hippocampal CA1 neurons. J Neurophysiol 83: 1394 –1402, 2000.
Steriade M, McCormick D, Sejnowski T. Thalamocortical oscillations in the
sleeping and aroused brain. Science 262: 679 – 685, 1993a.
Steriade M, Nunez A, Amzica F. Intracellular analysis of relations between
the slow (Ͻ1 Hz) neocortical oscillation and other sleep rhythms of the
electroencephalogram. J Neurosci 13: 3266 –3283, 1993b.
Stratford KJ, Tarczy-Hornoch K, Martin KAC, Bannister NJ, Jack JJ.
Excitatory synaptic inputs to spiny stellate cells in cat visual cortex. Nature
382: 258 –261, 1996.
Suga N, Ma X. Multiparametric corticofugal modulation and plasticity in the
auditory system. Nat Rev Neurosci 4: 783–794, 2003.
Sun QQ, Huguenard JR, Prince DA. Barrel cortex microcircuits: thalamocortical feedforward inhibition in spiny stellate cells is mediated by a small
number of fast-spiking interneurons. J Neurosci 26: 1219 –1230, 2006.
Sun YG, Pita-Almenar JD, Wu CS, Renger JJ, Uebele VN, Lu HC,
Beierlein M. Biphasic cholinergic synaptic transmission controls action
potential activity in thalamic reticular nucleus neurons. J Neurosci 33:
2048 –2059, 2013.
Swadlow H, Gusev A. The impact of “bursting” thalamic impulses at a
neocortical synapse. Nat Neurosci 4: 402– 408, 2001.
Tsodyks MV, Markram H. The neural code between neocortical pyramidal
neurons depends on neurotransmitter release probability. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 94: 719 –723, 1997.
Turner JP, Salt TE. Characterization of sensory and corticothalamic excitatory inputs to rat thalamocortical neurones in vitro. J Physiol 510: 829 –
843, 1998.
Venkataraman Y, Bartlett EL. Postnatal development of synaptic properties
of the GABAergic projection from the inferior colliculus to the auditory
thalamus. J Neurophysiol 109: 2866 –2882, 2013.
von Krosigk M, Bal T, McCormick D. Cellular mechanisms of a synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science 261: 361–364, 1993.
Wanaverbecq N, Bodor ÁL, Bokor H, Slézia A, Lüthi A, Acsády L.
Contrasting the functional properties of GABAergic axon terminals with
single and multiple synapses in the thalamus. J Neurosci 28: 11848 –11861,
2008.
Wang X, Wei Y, Vaingankar V, Wang Q, Koepsell K, Sommer FT, Hirsch
JA. Feedforward excitation and inhibition evoke dual modes of firing in the
cat’s visual thalamus during naturalistic viewing. Neuron 55: 465– 478,
2007.
Wang XJ. Multiple dynamical modes of thalamic relay neurons: rhythmic
bursting and intermittent phase-locking. Neuroscience 59: 21–31, 1994.
Watson BO, MacLean JN, Yuste R. UP states protect ongoing cortical
activity from thalamic inputs. PLoS One 3: e3971, 2008.
Wehr M, Zador AM. Synaptic mechanisms of forward suppression in rat
auditory cortex. Neuron 47: 437– 445, 2005.
Willis A, Llano D. Enhanced thalamocortical activity secondary to thalamic
reticular nucleus activation: a computational model (Abstract). Neuroscience Meeting Planner 2012: Abstract 368.16, 2012.
Winer JA, Saint Marie RL, Larue DT, Oliver DL. GABAergic feedforward
projections from the inferior colliculus to the medial geniculate body. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 93: 8005– 8010, 1996.
Wolfart J, Debay D, Le Masson G, Destexhe A, Bal T. Synaptic background
activity controls spike transfer from thalamus to cortex. Nat Neurosci 8:
1760 –1767, 2005.
Yamada WM, Koch C, Adams PR. Multiple channels and calcium dynamics.
In: Methods in Neuronal Modeling. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989, p.
97–133.
Yu XJ, Xu XX, Chen X, He S, He J. Slow recovery from excitation of
thalamic reticular nucleus neurons. J Neurophysiol 101: 980 –987, 2009.
Zikopoulos B, Barbas H. Prefrontal projections to the thalamic reticular
nucleus form a unique circuit for attentional mechanisms. J Neurosci 26:
7348 –7361, 2006.
Zikopoulos B, Barbas H. Pathways for emotions and attention converge on
the thalamic reticular nucleus in primates. J Neurosci 32: 5338 –5350, 2012.

J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00926.2014 • www.jn.org

