Biological
Cybemetics

Biol. Cybern. 68, 275 283 (1993)

9 Springer-Verlag 1993

A neurophysiologically-based mathematical model
of flash visual evoked potentials
Ben H. Jansen ~, George Zouridakis 1, Michael E. Brandt 2
1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Bioengineering Research Center, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204-4793, USA
2 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Texas Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Received: 4 March 1992/Accepted in revised form: 27 June 1992

Abstract. Evidence is presented that a neurophysiologically-inspired mathematical model, originally developed
for the generation of spontaneous EEG (electroencephalogram) activity, can produce VEP (visual evoked
potential)-like waveforms when pulse-like signals serve
as input. It was found that the simulated VEP activity
was mainly due to intracortical excitatory connections
rather than direct thalamic input. Also, the model-generated VEPs exhibited similar relationships between
prestimulus EEG characteristics and subsequent VEP
morphology, as seen in human data. Specifically, the
large correlation between the N1 amplitude and the
prestimulus alpha phase angle, and the insensitivity of
P2 to the latter feature, as observed in actual VEPs to
low intensity flashes, was also found in the model-generated data. These findings provide support for the
hypothesis that the spontaneous EEG and the VEP are
generated by some of the same neural structures and
that the VEP is due to distributed activity, rather than
dipolar sources.

1 Introduction
Very little is known about the neural substrate of most
evoked potential (EP) components (Goff et al. 1978).
Numerous attempts have been made to determine the
location of the sources of EP activity within the brain,
but these approaches generally make simplifying assumptions about the shape of the source (i.e., a dipole),
the number of them, and other parameters (see Barrett
1986 for a review). There is some recent evidence
(Rogers et al. 1990, 1991) that a progressive excitation
of adjacent cortical columns accounts for some EP
components, indicating that the EP source is not from
a single neurological structure but that it is the response
of a larger section of the cortex to a specific afferent
input. In other words, the same neural structures that
Correspondence to: B. H. Jansen

produce the spontaneous EEG activity may also be
responsible for the generation of EP activity. The
present study was conducted to explore this hypothesis.
In this paper, we report on the degree to which the
flash-visual evoked potential (VEP) can be simulated
using a neurophysiologicaUy-based mathematical model
originally developed for the generation of spontaneous
electroencephalogram (EEG) activity, when presented
with a transient input.
In using this model, we take a system's approach to
EP generation. That is, we consider the evoked potential as the output ~f a system excited by a transient,
reflecting the volley of neural activity generated by a
sensory event. This transient sums with other cortical
and/or sub-cortical activity entering the same region of
the cortex. At the most abstract level, the sensory input
can be viewed as an impulse, and the evoked output as
an impulse response. The nonlinearity of the neural
networks processing the sensory input, and the fact that
these networks receive sensory and nonsensory-related
input simultaneously, accounts for most of the EP characteristics and variability reported in the literature.
Among other things, it might account for the nonlinear
interaction between visual input and the EEG in
steady-state VEPs (Mast and Victor 1991), the 'augmenting' and 'reducing' responses to stimuli of different
intensities (see Pineda et al. 1991 for a review), and
the relationship between alpha phase at the moment
of stimulation and VEP shape (Jansen and Brandt
1991).

2 Modeling of EEG and EP activity

2.1 Background
A substantial amount of literature exists on models of
neural networks (see Nunez 1981; MacGregor 1987;
Cotterill 1988; Koch and Segev 1989 for a review),
although only a few deal with EEGs. In this context,
the work by Freeman, Lopes da Silva, and Katznelson
is of particular relevance.

276

Freeman (1975, 1987a) has attempted to model the
spatial and temporal properties of potentials in the
olfactory bulb through the use of a hierarchy of 'K
sets'. For example, a KO set is characterized by a
collection of neurons with a common input source
and a common output polarity (i.e., either excitatory
or inhibitory), having no functional interconnections.
The KI set is a KO set with dense connections within
the set. A KII set consists of interconnected KI sets,
and so on. Freeman's approach starts from single neurons and can best be characterized as a local-circuit
approach.
In contrast, a lumped-parameter approach was followed by Lopes da Silva et al. (1974) in their development of a model to explain the origin of alpha activity.
They postulated that thalamocortical relay cells (TRCs)
receive a random pulse train as input causing a postsynaptic potential (which is measurable as the scalp
recorded EEG) and the firing of a new pulse train
which impinges on interneurons (INs). The INs inhibit
the TRCs. It was demonstrated that this negative feedback model acts as a filter, producing activity in the
alpha frequency range (van Rotterdam et al. 1982).
Because the TRC cells could be situated in the thalamus
or in the cerebral cortex, the Lopes da Silva model may
be viewed as a model of a single cortical column when
an excitatory feedback loop is added (Lopes da Silva et
al. 1976). (The organization of the cerebral cortex in
vertically oriented columns of 200-300 ~tm in diameter
was established by Mountcastle 1957).
Katznelson (1981) argued the importance of cortico-cortical connections of the cerebral cortex and
especially the relatively long-range excitatory connections made by pyramidal neurons. He modeled the
cortex as a two-dimensional spherical surface. The
change in potential at any point on this surface can be
determined by a set of equations, reflecting the effect of
excitatory and inhibitory connections among surface
regions. Katznelson linearized the input-output relation
between neural mass activity and the synaptic inputs to
it, in order to facilitate analytical evaluation. He
showed that the model had certain normal modes (resonances), corresponding to EEG activity, including alpha and delta rhythms, depending on the selected
values for the excitatory and inhibitory gain constants.
Katznelson suggested (but did not give proof) that any
transient input to a cortical region would elicit a series
of normal modes which are linearly combined to produce an EP.

investigators (Babloyantz et al. 1985; Rapp et al. 1985;
Freeman 1987b; Skarda and Freeman 1987). We followed Katznelson's lead, however, in exploring the
importance of (long-range) excitatory connections by
adding an excitatory feedback loop to Lopes da Silva's
model. Specifically, the model is based on two interacting populations of neurons; one consisting of pyramidal
cells and the other of local excitatory and inhibitory
interneurons (see Fig. 1).
The linear systems labeled he(t) and hi(t), convert
axonal pulses to postsynaptic potentials. The impulse
response functions he(t) and hi(t) are shaped to resemble an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) and an
inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP), respectively.
The input to these linear systems is pulse density rather
than a series of single pulses. This enables us to mimic
the integrating action of the soma. A static, nonlinear
(sigmoidal) element (f~[V] for the pyramidal cells and
excitatory interneurons, and f,.[V] for the inhibitory
interneurons) relates the average level of membrane
potential to the pulse density of action potentials fired
by the neurons. Finally, interconnectivity constants representing the average number of synaptic contacts from
pyramidal cells to interneurons (CI and C3), and from
interneurons to pyramidal cells for both excitatory (C4)
and inhibitory (C2) branches are used. The external
pulse density P(t) forms the input to the model, and
consists of activity originating from adjacent and more
distant cortical columns, as well as from subcortical
structures (e.g., thalamus). V(t) represents the membrane potential of the pyramidal cells and is to be taken
as representative of the cortical EEG (Lopes da Silva
and Storm van Leeuwen 1977). Interneurons receive
input not only from local neuronal circuits but also
from both specific and intracortical afferents (Brazier

P(t)

i

(t)

2.2 The cortical column model
pyramidal cells

The model of EEG and EP generation we explored
contains components of Lopes da Silva's and Katznelson's work. We retained the nonlinearities in the cortical column model as originally proposed by Lopes da
Silva and which were ignored by Katznelson. Retaining
the nonlinearities means that the model can produce
chaotic activity, which is important given the fact that
the possible chaotic nature of various forms of EEG
activity has been demonstrated by several groups of

I I

interneurons

Fig. l. Lumped parameter model for VEP generation. Two interacting populations of neurons are present: one consists of pyramidal
cells and the other of local excitatory (upper branch) and inhibitory
(lower branch) interneurons, h(t) and f(V) represent the PSP generation and the pulse-to-voltage conversion functions, respectively. Subscripts e and i are used to denote the excitatory and the inhibitory
branches, respectively. C's represent the strength of the synaptic
contacts from one population onto the other. P(t) designates afferent
activity, whereas V(t) is the membrane potential which is proportional to the EEG

277

1964). This is taken into account by introducing a
third branch into the model w h i c h - through C5, a
weighting c o n s t a n t - sends part of the input signal
directly to the input of the excitatory loop. (This
branch is active during external stimulation only.) In
the current version of the model, a similar mechanism
has not been implemented for the inhibitory loop,
both for simplicity and because of the physiological
evidence that inhibitory neurons receive direct afferent
input through interneurons only (Andersson et al.
1971; Lopes da Silva et al. 1976; Szentfingothai 1978),
although other studies suggest the opposite (Toyama
et al. 1974; Douglas et al. 1989).
The following expressions for the EPSP and IPSP
generating blocks, originally proposed by van Rotterdam et al. (1982), have been used:

he(t)={Aate-at

t>~O
t<0

(1)

8.0"

rnV
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0

l

2'0

o

,0

6'0

A

80
Ills

8.0
mV
6.0

and

h~(t)={Bbt e bt t~O
t <0'

4.0

(2)

where A = 3 . 2 5 m V , B = 2 2 m u
a = 1 0 0 s - 1 , and
b = 50s-L
Equations (1) and (2) approximate the operation
of the neuronal population in the linear range. The
rate constants a and b are interpreted as being the
lumped representation of the sum of the reciprocal of
the time constant of passive membrane and all other
spatially distributed delays, including temporal dispersion in the afferent tract, synaptic diffusion, and
resistive-capacitive delay in the dendritic network
(Freeman 1975). All the delays are lumped together
for the sake of simplicity and because they depend
mainly on structural and chemical properties of the
neuron, which are relatively invariant for a given input
set. (Alternatively, this impulse response can be chosen
as the sum of two exponential functions as described
by Freeman 1975.)
The use of (1) and (2) leads to an IPSP that is
both larger in amplitude and longer in duration than
an EPSP (see Fig. 2), although typically reported functions show identically shaped EPSPs and ISPSs (Curtis
and Eccles 1957). In a personal communication, Lopes
da Silva explained that the model was originally developed for thalamic activity and later extended to cortical alpha generation. The hi(t) used was a reasonable
approximation for the one proposed by Andersen and
Sears (1964) (the original thalamic data used), whereas
the he(t) was a compromise between the two forms
proposed in the same article. The choice for a larger
amplitude hi(t) can also be justified considering that
inhibitory neurons synapse closer to the somata of
pyramidal cells (often on the cell body) than excitatory
neurons (Kandel and Schwartz 1985). This makes the
effect of one inhibitory neuron about 10 times stronger
than an excitatory one.
The nonlinear function f(v), which represents both
f~(v) andf~(v), is static and has the form of a sigmoid as

2.0

0.0

o "2'0" go'6.0"8'0

B

13o

120

ms

Fig. 2. A EPSP and B IPSP generating functions

f(V)
5
4
3
2
1

05

o

5

10

1'5

zb

i5
mV

Fig. 3. Sigmoid function used for the voltage-to-pulse conversion
process

depicted in Fig. 3. It is given by the following formula
(Lopes da Silva et al. 1976),

f(v)

= ~eo e -r(v~
v ~ Vo
~eo( 2 _ e-~(v-vo)) v > Vo'

which is very similar to one proposed by Freeman
(1975). The values of the parameters are the (empiri-

278
cally determined, see Freeman 1987b) asymptotic maximum of the curve 2 e 0 = 5 . 0 s - ] , and its gain
7 = 0.45 m V - ]. The mean firing threshold of the neural
population is taken to be v0 = 6 mV.
Because of its shape, the sigmoid exhibits the recruiting mechanism that takes place when an EPSP
excites a cluster of neurons with statistically distributed
thresholds, and it also takes into account the presence
of a refractory period (Zetterberg et al. 1978). The
validity of this formula rests on the assumption that the
total number of afferent fibers reaching each cell in the
population is sufficiently large, for it is only in this case
that all cells will be subject to approximately the same
average excitation as it has been assumed in the derivation of this formula (Wilson and Cowan 1972).
As stated by Lopes da Silva et al. (1976), this model
should not be considered the model of the EEG since
the information available about various phenomena
included in the scalp recorded EEG is incomplete, so
that 'exact' models are elusive. Nevertheless, this model
takes into consideration some of the known underlying
physiological mechanisms of the cortex such as: I)
existence of two populations of neurons (pyramidal
cells and interneurons); 2) recursion and feedback of
information in an excitatory/inhibitory fashion (two
lateral branches); 3) synaptic phenomena including
temporal dispersion, diffusion, and resistive-capacitive
delay in the dendritic network (EPSP and IPSP functions); and 4) linear and nonlinear interactions observed in actual neural networks.

2.3 The model input
The model input P(t) in the 'spontaneous EEG'-mode is
random noise, representing the effects of adjacent cortical columns and deeper brain structures. Two distinct
and relatively independent mechanisms have been implemented to simulate the specific and nonspecific afferent activity elicited by, in the present case, a flash of
light. The first mechanism represents activity on the

direct channel that conveys information from the retina
to the cortex through the lateral geniculate nucleus
(LGN) specific afferent tract. This is modeled by
adding a transient to the model input P(t). The time
course of this transient is based on the form and the
time delay of the impulse response of the visual system.
This impulse response has been determined both directly and indirectly through intracortical cell potential
measurements (Brazier 1958, 1964; Kelly 1961; Watson
and Nachmias 1977; Wilson et al. 1983; Fester and
Lindstrfm 1984; Ducati et al. 1988). In our model, the
input function represents pulse density (not membrane
potential). It has been found that in order to get a
membrane potential with the characteristics previously
described it is necessary that a pulse function be present
at the input. Therefore, this mechanism for information
transmission is modeled by a monophasic exponential
function (depicted in Fig. 4A) with form and numerical
values similar to the one proposed by Watson and
Nachmias (1977), and given by
Vlk) =q w

e-k/w'

(3)

with n = 7, w = 5, and q = 0.0001. It is this function
which is added to the noise input P(t).
The second mechanism represents activity on an
indirect channel, consisting mainly of cortico-cortical
afferents (both callosal and ipsilateral), and projections
from higher order cortices. It also includes other subcortical projections to the cortex (such as those from
non-LGN thalamic nuclei and the brainstem). The time
delay on this channel is expected to be longer than the
delay on the direct channel, and variable within a time
range (between 90 and 100 ms). This second excitation
mechanism is modeled by way of a transient increase of
the excitatory connectivity constants C~, (72, and C5,
starting at a random delay of between 90 and 100 ms.
This approach is based on the fact that EEG desynchronization is typically observed about 100 ms after
the presentation of a stimulus and is related to in-

0.07
0.06"
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
5O

A

i~o

i00

200

0.140.120.i0.080.060.040.02-

B

I

I

I

200

400

600

86o

I

i000

Fig. 4. A Excitation function due to specific
afferent input. B Excitation function due to
nonspecific afferentinput

279

creased excitability (Steriade and Llinfis 1988). Thus,
the second excitation mechanism accounts mostly for
the increased cortical activity due to the recruiting
mechanism known to take place. It is not necessary to
make similar changes in the inhibitory branch because
inhibitory mechanisms are thought to be blocked during EEG desynchronization (Steriade and Llinfis 1988).
The function we used (shown in Fig. 4B) is, again, a
monophasic version of the one proposed by Watson
and Nachmias (1977), given by
(4)

v2(k) = ~k e -dk ,

with ~ = 0.0035, and d = 0.01. Starting at a random
delay of between 90 and 100 ms the function v2 is added
to the connectivity constants Cl, C2, and C5.
3 Results

The model produced I alpha-like activity for connection
coefficients set at C~ = C2 = 0.05, C3 = 0.08, and
Ca = 0.06. The input noise P ( t ) had a mean value of 2.4
and a standard deviation of 2.0. A detailed description
of the model behavior as a function of these model
parameters can be found in Zouridakis (1990) and will
be the subject of another paper.
A single-trial VEP consisted of one second of prestimulus EEG followed by one second of poststimulus
activity. In order to investigate the relationship between

i All simulations were done using the forward Euler multi-step
technique, with a sampling interval of 1 ms

l

the phase of the prestimulus alpha activity and the
shape of the resulting VEP, selective averaging of single
trials was performed. The procedure used to generate
the simulated VEPs was similar to the one applied to
human data (Brandt 1989; Jansen and Brandt 1991).
Specifically, the phase of the alpha rhythm at the time
of stimulation was divided into eight groups (numbered
from 0 to 7) with a 45 degrees phase difference between
successive groups (see inset, Fig. 5). Single-trial VEPs
were, then, clustered on the basis of this phase angle.
The model was set to produce alpha activity, and
after one second (1000 iterations), a stimulus, as described in the preceding section, was presented at a
specific alpha-phase angle. Subsequent stimuli were separated by three-second intervals, thus the model was
allowed enough time to return to steady state. The state
of the system at the end of a trial formed the initial
conditions of the following iteration, i.e., the model was
not re-initialized at the beginning of each trial.
There is a slight difference between human and
simulated data in the way the phase was controlled. In
the human data, stimuli were presented in a pseudorandom manner, and the phase of the alpha activity at
the moment of stimulation was determined a posteriori.
Consequently, the phase angles of the trials in, say,
phase category 6, were more or less uniformly distributed between 3rc/8 and 57r/8. In the simulated data,
however, the phase angle was determined a priori,
hence, all stimuli in a specific phase category were
presented at exactly the same phase (e.g., 3~/8 for
category 6 and 5rr/8 for category 7).
A complete set of eight selectively averaged VEP
responses, as produced by the model, is shown in Fig.

Fig. 5. VEPs produced by the model as a function of

--

the phase angle of the alpha activity at the time of
stimulation. Monopolar recordings. The phase angle
classes are indicated in the inset

1

-1

0

ls

280

vVVW
A 'VVvW

2

_

-1

ls

Fig. 6. VEP responses obtained from a human subject. The indicated

l
ls

phases correspond to the phase angles shown in the inset of Fig. 5

Fig. 7. VEPs produced by the model. Bipolar recordings. The numbers correspond to the phase angles shown in the inset of Fig. 5

5. A similar set for human VEP data is shown in Fig. 6.
Each trace in these figures depicts one second of prestimulus and one second of poststimulus activity. The
time of stimulation is indicated by a vertical line (designated as time zero on the horizontal axis). The numbers
on the left indicate the phase angles used to group the
corresponding traces.
The output signal produced by the model is comparable to the intracortical membrane potential, and
represents monopolar activity in its purest form, i.e.,
with one electrode over the electrically active site and
the second electrode at infinity. For this reason, further
processing was required to produce a signal similar to
scalp-recorded EEG. We hypothesize that this processing is essentially a differentiation process, in analogy to
the relationship between membrane voltages in heartmuscle tissue and the surface-recorded electrocardiogram (ECG). A 'noisy' approximation of this operation
is obtained by replacing the output samples by the
difference between two successive samples in the sequence. The effect of the noise that this approach
introduces was reduced by low-pass filtering. The latter
also simulates the filtering effect due to the meningi,
skull and scalp on the electrocorticogram. The low-pass
operation was implemented with a zero-phase (IIR,
'bidirectional') filter with cut-off frequency set at 35 Hz.
Figure 7 shows the VEPs obtained after applying the
aforementioned differentiation and low-pass filtering
procedure to the signals shown in Fig. 5.
A global similarity is apparent between the human
and simulated data, as can be seen by comparing Figs.

6 and 7. Notice that beginning 1 s before the onset of
the stimulus, the prestimulus activity is synchronized
alpha and increases as the moment of stimulation approaches. This is true in all cases and is expected based
on the autocorrelation function of alpha activity, since
selective averaging of single trials resembles an autocorrelation function computation, which assumes its maximum value at time zero. However, for most phase
angles, the alpha amplitude increases even after the
onset of the stimulus and reaches a maximum at a
latency that corresponds to that of the N1 component.
The most negative deflection around 100 ms poststimulus was taken as the N1. There is a strong influence of the alpha phase on this component. In the
simulated data the maximum N1 is attained for phase
number 1, and its minimum for phase number 7. In
human data, on average, these phases correspond to 2
and 6 (over 7 subjects and 16 data sets) (Jansen and
Brandt 1991), respectively. Also the latency of N1
shows some variation. Minimum and maximum N1
latencies are reached at phases 7 and 5, respectively,
in the human data set and at 6 and 5 in the simulated
data set.
Another similarity between the human and simulated data is that approximately 120-140 ms after the
presentation of the stimulus (at a latency that corresponds to the beginning of the P2 component, i.e., the
second positive peak), a rather drastic change in the
pattern of the VEP takes place and the alpha activity is
highly reduced (in the simulated data the oscillatory
pattern disappears), whereas later activity, after about

281

t

t

1"
_

l
1"
500 ms

stimulus

Fig. 8. Simulated single-trial VEPs demonstrating alpha blocking
approximately 120 ms poststimulus

another 140ms, is again oscillatory and falls in the
alpha band. This 'alpha blocking' is visible also on a
single trial basis as Fig. 8 shows, indicating that the
alpha reduction seen in the VEP actually takes place
and is not the result of averaging (due, for example, to
lack of synchronization).
Interestingly, the latency of occurrence of the positive peak in the P2 range seems to be unaffected by the
phase angle of stimulation in both human and simulated
data. Its amplitude, however, as peak-to-peak measurement reveals, does depend on the phase of the alpha
rhythm at the time of stimulation and assumes its largest
value at phase 2 for both human and simulated data.
Also, the average poststimulus activity does not have the
same amplitude for all phase angles. Phases 1, 2 and
especially 6 show lower amplitude. In our human data
set, low amplitude poststimulus activity corresponded to
phases 2 and 5. Beyond the similarities between actual
and simulated data, some obvious differences do exist.
For instance, in the case of human data the transition
from 'alpha blocked' to 'alpha re-instated' is much
smoother, and a transitional oscillation between the two
states is present. In the simulated data, this transition is
completed in one step, i.e., the positive P2 peak is
followed almost immediately by the oscillatory alpha
pattern. In order to de-couple the effect of the two
simultaneously occurring types of stimulation (i.e., the
presentation of a pulse at the input and the changes
effected by varying C5, C2 and C~), the procedure that
generates VEPs was repeated with the exception that
now the model was given a stimulus at the input only.
That is, only the function depicted in Fig. 4A was
activated while the excitatory connectivity constants
remained fixed during the course of the experiment. All
other functions and parameter values remained the
same. This type of stimulation would account for the
hypothetical case whereby a neuronal column receives
only (specific afferent) input from the LGN and there is

-I

0

1s

Fig. 9. VEPsproducedby the modelwith a direct excitationstimulus

only at the input. Again,the numberscorrespond to the phase angles
shown in the inset of Fig. 5
no interaction with adjacent columns or other subcortical structures. Figure 9 summarizes the results obtained.
As one can see, there is little difference between the
pre- and poststimulus averaged activity, and there is
little evidence of evoked potential activity at all.
In a different set of experiments, only random noise
was given at the input. Thus, the model was excited
only indirectly by way of varying the excitatory connectivity constants CI, C2, and C5 using the function given
by (4). The effect of each of these parameters was
studied by activating either C5 only, C1 and (:72only, or
CI, C2, and (75 simultaneously. These experiments
would account for the (again) hypothetical situation
whereby only nonspecific afferent input is present. It
was found that an increase of C5 only (i.e., an increase
in subcortical-to-cortical connections only) had very
little effect on the evoked response. On the other hand,
VEPs produced by increasing either C1 and (]2 only, or
C1, C2, and C5 simultaneously are practically the same
as those shown in Fig. 7 (obtained with both direct and
indirect excitation), suggesting that the response can be
attributed mainly to the excitatory constants C1 and C2,
i.e., to intracortical excitatory connections, which is in
accordance with microanatomical data presented by
Douglas et al. (1989).
4 Conclusions

Ongoing EEG activity (in particular the alpha rhythm)
has been successfully modeled by means of a nonlinear,

282
lumped-parameter model representing localized cortical
activity. This model, originally developed by Lopes da
Silva et al. (1974, 1976), takes into account some
dynamical characteristics of the brain. Our slightly
modified version includes a direct excitatory branch
through C5, and makes use of new values for the
connectivity constants C1 through Ca. When subjected
to appropriate stimulation, the model is capable of
producing VEP-like waveforms having a phenomenological global similarity to actual EEG/VEP recordings.
The major findings regarding VEP generation are summarized below.
When stimuli are synchronized with a specific phase
angle of the prestimulus alpha activity, one observes
that the prestimulus alpha activity appears to continue
into the N1 latency range. The amplitude of this activity seems to increase even after the onset of the stimulus
and reaches a maximum at phase 0 that corresponds to
the positive zero-crossing. This increase could be explained as resulting from an increase in the excitatory
branch of the network due to the particular nature of
the indirect stimulus. However, the increase observed in
the amplitude of the VEP takes place well before the
indirect excitation in the model is activated (the latter
kicks in at least 90 ms after the direct-stimulus onset,
see Sect. 2.3). Thus, such a possibility has to be discarded. Another possibility could be the direct stimulus
which is added to the input. Yet, we have found that an
increase of the mean value of the input of the model
results in a decrease of the output (Zouridakis 1990),
therefore this option has to be discarded, too. Alternatively, it can be hypothesized that a phase reorganization takes place after the arrival of the stimulus, i.e., the
stimulus resets the phase of the output signal. This
same phenomenon was seen in a model for hippocampal neuronal activity (Traub et al. 1988), whereby a
brief stimulus was capable of resetting the output
phase. Such phase reorganizational behavior is quite
common in nonlinear systems and has been observed in
several biological oscillators as well (Winfree 1987;
Glass and Mackey 1988). Our studies suggest that
similar behavior is observed in the cortical EEG.
The N1 component was found not to be due to
direct thalamic input; rather it was the result of a
gradual activation of excitatory intracortical connections. This is in accordance with the physiological data
and the model predictions reported by Douglas et al.
(1989), whereby a simplified circuit of the cat striate
cortex was developed based on intracellular in vivo
recordings. Similar results are shown in a recent study
of auditory EPs obtained via evoked magnetic-field
recordings, in which a dynamic excitation pattern of
adjacent columns was suggested as the source of the
auditory N l m component (i.e., the magnetic equivalent
of N1) (Rogers et al. 1990). Our model predicts this
mechanism for N1 generation, in the sense that the EP
activity generated in our model is primarily due to
adjacent cortical columns.
The poststimulus activity undergoes a drastic reduction in amplitude at a latency that corresponds to the
beginning of P2, and it is fully re-instated about 200 ms

poststimulus. The appearance of the model-generated
P2 is directly related to the form of the excitation
function which allows for a brief, high increase in the
excitatory branch that drives the system temporarily to
saturation which, in turn, results in the absence of the
oscillatory output. However, as this function decreases,
the system output returns to the oscillatory pattern.
This transition in human data is smoother than in the
simulated data and the change between the states 'alpha
blocked' and 'alpha re-instated' is more gradual. Thus,
the P2 component accessed in our data was actually
only a positive-going peak at that latency and not a full
component. In physiological terms this would imply
that a more complex mechanism is involved in the excitation process and the consequent appearance of P2.
Since alpha activity is blocked at the time that
corresponds to the P2 latency, the latter is expected to
be unaffected by prestimulus alpha characteristics. It
turns out that the latency of this component is not
affected by the phase angle of the alpha at the time of
stimulation. Its amplitude, however, was found to reach
a maximum value at phase 2 and a minimum at phase
6. Brandt's (1989) results show a maximum value at
phases corresponding to the negative zero-crossing
(numbers 3, 4, and 5). Again, this discrepancy suggests
that late components, such as the P2, may be due to
different excitation processes, involving larger regions
of the brain.
The major contributor to the model-generated VEP
is the excitation function that involves the connectivity
constants C1, C2, and C5. This is in accordance with
the neurophysiological fact that the effect of excitation
is exerted mainly (but not only) on interneurons rather
than on pyramidal cells directly (Brazier 1964; Szenffmgothai 1978).
In conclusion, these studies strongly suggest that the
neurophysiological structures responsible for the generation of spontaneous E E G (and especially, alpha activity) are also involved in the generation of the VEPs.
For a more direct test of the moving dipole hypothesis
we intend to interconnect a number of cortical column
models (rather than increasing the excitatory feedback
gain). By making some (or all) of the cortical columns
sensitive to specific stimulus properties only (for example, some column models respond only to vertical lines
and others to horizontal line segments), it will be possible to explore Katznelson's hypothesis that the particular set of normal modes that are excited (and give rise
to different EPs) depend on the manner and spatial
extent of the delivered stimulus.

References

Andersen P, Sears TA (1964) The role of inhibition in the phasing of
spontaneous thalamo-corticaldischarges. J Physiol 173:459-480
Andersson SA, Holmgren E, Manson JR (1971) Localized thalamic
rhythmicity induced by spinal and cortical lesions. Electroencephal Clin Neurophysiol 31:347-356
Babloyantz A, Salazar JM, Nicolis C (1985) Evidence of chaotic
dynamics of brain activity during the sleep cycle. Phys Lett
IllA:152-156

283
Barrett G (1986) Analytic techniques in the estimation of evoked
potentials. In: Lopes da Silva LH, Storm van Leeuwen W,
R6mond A (eds) Clinical applications of computer analysis of
EEG and other neurophysiological signals. Elsevier Scientific
Publishers, Amsterdam, pp 311-333
Brandt ME (1989) The relationship between prestimulus EEG and
visual evoked potentials. Ph.D.-dissertation, Biomedical Engineering Program, University of Houston, Houston
Brazier MAB (1958) Studies of evoked responses by flash in man and
cat. In: Reticular formation of the brain. Little Brown & Co.,
Boston, pp 151-176
Brazier MAB (1964) Evoked responses recorded from the depths of
the human brain. Ann NY Acad Sci 112:33-59
Cotterill RMJ (ed) (1988) Computer simulation in brain science.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Curtis DR, Eccles JC (1957) The time course of excitatory and
inhibitory synaptic action. J Physiol 145:522
Douglas R J, Martin KAC, Whitteridge D (1989) A canonical microcircuit for neocortex. Neural Computat 1:480-488
Ducati A, Fava E, Motti EDF (1988) Neuronal generators of the
visual evoked potentials: intracerebral recordings in awake humans. Electroencephal Clin Neurophysiol 71:89-99
Fester D, Lindstrrm S (1984) Neuronal circuitry of the cat visual
cortex. In: Edelman GM, Gall WE, Cowan WM (eds) Dynamic
aspects of neocortical function. John Wiley, New York, pp
87-103
Freeman WJ (1975) Mass action in the nervous system. Academic
Press, New York
Freeman WJ (1987a) Analytic techniques in the search for the
physiological basis of the EEG. In: Gevins AS, Rrmond A (eds)
Methods of analysis of brain electrical and magnetic signals.
EEG Handbook, vol 1. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Freeman WJ (1987b) Simulation of chaotic EEG patterns with a
dynamical model of the olfactory system. Biol Cybern 56:139150
Glass L, Mackey MC (1988) From clocks to chaos, the rhythms of
life. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Goff WR, Allison T, Vaughan Jr HG (1978) The functional neuroanatomy of the event-related potentials. In: Callaway E,
Tueting P, Koslow SH (eds) Event-related brain potentials in
man. Academic Press, New York, pp 1-79
Jansen BH, Brandt ME (1991) The effect of the phase of prestimulus
alpha activity on the averaged visual evoked response. Electroencephal Clin Neurophysiol 80:241-250
Kandel ER, Schwartz JH (1985) Principles of neural science. Elsevier,
Amsterdam
Katznelson RD (1981) Normal modes of the brain: neuroanatomical
basis and a physiological theoretical model. In: Nunez P (ed)
Electric fields of the brain: the neurophysics of EEG. Oxford
University Press, New York, pp 401-442
Kelly DH (1961) Visual response to time-dependent stimuli. II.
Single-channel model of the photopic visual system. J Opt Soc
Am 51:747-754
Koch C, Segev I (eds) (1989) Methods in neuronal modeling: from
synapses to networks. MIT Press, Cambridge
Lopes da Silva FH, Hoeks A, Zetterberg LH (1974) Model of brain
rhythmic activity. Kybernetik 15:27-37
Lopes da Silva FH, Rotterdam A van, Barts P, Heusden E van, Burr
W (1976) Model of neuronal populations. The basic mechanism
of rhythmicity. In: Corner MA, Swaab DF (eds) Progress in
brain research, vol 45. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 281-308

Lopes da Silva FH, Storm van Leeuwen W (1977) The cortical
sources of the alpha rhythm. Neurosci Lett 6:237-241
MacGregor RJ (1987) Neural and brain modeling. Academic Press,
New York
Mast J, Victor JD (1991) Fluctuations of steady-state VEPs: Interaction of driven evoked potentials and the EEG. Electroencephal
Clin Neurophysiol 78:389-401
Mountcastle VB (1957) Modality and topographic properties of
single neurons of cat's somatic sensory cortex. J Neurophysiol
20:408-434
Nunez PL (1981) Electric fields of the brain: the neurophysics of
EEG. Oxford University Press, New York
Pineda JA, Holmes TC, Foote SL (1991) Intensity-amplitude relationships in monkey event-related potentials: parallels to human
augmenting-reducing responses. Electroencephal Clin Neurophysiol 78:456-465
Rapp PE, Zimmerman ID, Albano AM, deGuzman GC, Greenbaum
NN, Bashore TR (1985) Experimental studies of chaotic neural
behavior: cellular activity and electroencephalographic signals.
In: Othmer HG (ed) Nonlinear oscillations in biology and chemistry. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, pp 175-205
Rogers RL, Papanicolaou AC, Baumann SD, Sydjar~ C, Eisenberg
HM (1990) Neuromagnetic evidence of a dynamic excitation
pattern generating the N100 auditory response. Electroencephal
Clin Neurophysiol 77:237-240
Rogers RL, Baumann SD, Papanicolaou AC, Bourbon TW, Alagarsamy S, Eisenberg HM (1991) Localization of the P3 sources
using magnetoencephalography and magnetic resonance imaging. Electroencephal Clin Neurophysiol 79:308-321
Rotterdam A van, Lopes da Silva FH, van den Ende J, Viergever
MA, Hermans AJ (1982) A model of the spatial-temporal characteristics of the alpha rhythm. Bull Math Biol 44:283-305
Skarda A, Freeman WJ (1987) How brains make chaos in order to
make sense of the world. Behav Brain Sci 10:161-195
Steriade M, Llin~s R (1988) The functional states of the thalamus
and the associated neuronal underplay. Physiol Rev 68: 649742
Szent~ingothai J (1978) The local neuronal apparatus of the cerebral
cortex. In: Cerebral correlates of conscious experience. Elsevier/
North Holland Biomedical Press, Amsterdam, pp 131-138
Traub RD, Miles R, Wong RKS (1988) Large scale simulations of
the hippocampus. IEEE Eng Med Biol 7:31-38
Toyama K, Matsunami K, Ohno T, Tokashiki S (1974) An intracellular study of neuronal organization in visual cortex. Exp Brain
Res 21:45-66
Watson AB, Nachmias J (1977) Patterns of temporal integration in
the detection of grating. Vision Res 17:893-902
Wilson HR, Cowan JD (1972) Excitatory and inhibitory interaction in localized populations of model neurons. Biophys J
12:1-24
Wilson CL, Babb TL, Halgren E, Crandall PH (1983) Visual receptive fields and response properties of neurons in fiuman temporal lobe and visual pathways. Brain 106:473-502
Winfree AT (1987) When time breaks down. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
Zetterberg LH, Kristiansson L, Mossberg K (1978) Performance
of a model for a local neuron population. Biol Cybern 31:1526
Zouridakis G (1990) Nonlinear modeling of EEG and VEP activity.
M.Sc.-Thesis, Biomedical Engineering Program, University of
Houston, Houston

