LETTER

Communicated by Olivier Faugeras

Realistically Coupled Neural Mass Models Can Generate EEG
Rhythms
Roberto C. Sotero
rcarlos@cneuro.edu.cu

Nelson J. Trujillo-Barreto
trujillo@cneuro.edu.cu

Yasser Iturria-Medina
iturria@cneuro.edu.cu
Cuban Neuroscience Center, Brain Dynamics Department, Havana, Cuba

Felix Carbonell
felix@icmf.inf.cu

Juan C. Jimenez
jcarlos@icmf.inf.cu
Instituto de Cibern´etica Matem´atica y F´ısica, Departamento de Sistemas Adaptativos,
Havana, Cuba

We study the generation of EEG rhythms by means of realistically coupled neural mass models. Previous neural mass models were used to
model cortical voxels and the thalamus. Interactions between voxels of
the same and other cortical areas and with the thalamus were taken into
account. Voxels within the same cortical area were coupled (short-range
connections) with both excitatory and inhibitory connections, while coupling between areas (long-range connections) was considered to be excitatory only. Short-range connection strengths were modeled by using
a connectivity function depending on the distance between voxels. Coupling strength parameters between areas were defined from empirical
anatomical data employing the information obtained from probabilistic
paths, which were tracked by water diffusion imaging techniques and
used to quantify white matter tracts in the brain. Each cortical voxel was
then described by a set of 16 random differential equations, while the
thalamus was described by a set of 12 random differential equations.
Thus, for analyzing the neuronal dynamics emerging from the interaction of several areas, a large system of differential equations needs to
be solved. The sparseness of the estimated anatomical connectivity matrix reduces the number of connection parameters substantially, making
the solution of this system faster. Simulations of human brain rhythms
were carried out in order to test the model. Physiologically plausible results were obtained based on this anatomically constrained neural mass
model.
Neural Computation 19, 478–512 (2007)

C

2007 Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Realistic Neural Mass Models

479

1 Introduction
We aim at describing a generative model of EEG rhythms based on anatomically constrained coupling of neural mass models. Although the biophysical
mechanisms underlying oscillatory activity in neurons are well studied, the
origin and function of global characteristics (such as EEG rhythms) of large
populations of neurons are still unknown. In this context, computational
models have proven capable of providing insight into this problem. Two
modeling approaches have been used to study the behavior of neuronal
populations. One approach is based on the study of large computational
neuronal networks in which each cell is realistically represented by multiple compartments for the soma, axon, and dendrites, and each synaptic
connection is modeled explicitly (Traub & Miles, 1991). A disadvantage of
such realistic modeling is that it requires high computational power. For
this reason, simplified versions of such models in which only one compartment model was taken into account have been used (Wang, Golomb, &
Rinzel, 1995; Rinzel, Terman, Wang, & Ermentrout, 1998). However, even
in this case, the use of such detailed models makes it difficult to determine
the influence of each model parameter on the generated average network
characteristics. The second approach is based on the use of neural mass
models (NMM). In contrast to neuronal networks, NMMs describe the dynamics of cortical columns and brain areas by using only a few parameters,
but without much detail. In this approach, spatially averaged magnitudes
are assumed to characterize the collective behavior of populations of neurons of a given type instead of modeling single cells and their interactions in a detailed network (Wilson & Cowan, 1972; Lopes da Silva, Hoeks,
Smits, & Zetterberg, 1974; Zetterberg, Kristiansson, & Mossberg, 1978; van
Rotterdam, Lopes da Silva, van den Ende, Viergever, & Hermans, 1982;
Jansen & Rit, 1995; Valdes, Jim´enez, Riera, Biscay, & Ozaki, 1999; Wendling,
Bellanger, Bartolomei, & Chauvel, 2000; David & Friston, 2003).
Despite their simplicity, NMMs have been very helpful in the study
of EEG rhythms. For example, in order to study the origin of the alpha
rhythm, Lopes da Silva et al. (1974) developed an NMM comprising two
interacting populations of neurons, the thalamocortical relay cells and the
inhibitory interneurons, which were interconnected by a negative feedback
loop. Later, this model was extended to include both positive and negative
feedback loops (Zetterberg et al., 1978; Jansen, Zouridakis, & Brandt, 1993).
In Jansen and Rit (1995), alpha and beta activities were replicated by using
two coupled neural mass models representing cortical areas with delays
in the interconnections between them. Wendling et al. (2000) investigated
the generation of epileptic spikes by extending Jansen’s model to multiple
coupled areas but explored the dynamics of only three areas for different
values of the connectivity constants. David and Friston (2003) considered
that a cortical area comprises several noninteracting neuronal populations
that were in turn described by Jansen’s models. This model allowed them

480

R. Sotero et al.

to reproduce the whole spectrum of EEG signals by changing the coupling
between two of these areas, thus showing the importance of parameters
related to the coupling between different brain regions for the resulting
dynamics.
Due to the lack of information about actual connectivity patterns, previous approaches have been devoted to the study of the temporal evolution
of neuronal populations rather than their spatial dynamics. However, the
development of techniques such as diffusion weighted magnetic resonance
imaging (DWMRI) in the past 20 years makes noninvasive study of the
anatomical brain circuitry of the living human brain possible. This has put
at our disposal extremely valuable information and gives us a unique opportunity to formulate models that take into account a more realistic view
of the central nervous system.
In this article, we extend Jansen’s model to characterize the dynamics of
a cortical voxel. Building on this, our goal is to study the rhythms obtained
when coupling several areas comprising large numbers of interconnected
voxels. In this approach, voxels of the same cortical area are assumed to
be coupled with excitatory and inhibitory connections (short-range connections), while connections between areas (long-range connections) are
assumed to be excitatory only. This is an extension of the model of David
and Friston (2003) because interactions between voxels within the same area
are taken into account. Additionally, we introduce anatomical constraints
on coupling strength parameters (CSP) between different brain regions.
This is accomplished by using CSPs estimated from human DWMRI data
(Iturria-Medina, Canales-Rodr´ıguez, Meli´e-Garcia, & Vald´es-Hern´andez,
2005). The thalamus is also modeled using a single NMM, mutually coupled with the cortical areas. We show that this anatomically constrained
NMM can reproduce the EEG rhythms recorded at the scalp, another step
in the validation of NMMs as a valuable tool for describing the activity of
large populations of neurons.
The letter is organized as follows. In section 2, the NMMs used for a
cortical voxel and the thalamus are formulated. Section 3 is devoted to
the modeling of short-range and long-range interactions. The integrated
thalamocortical model is formulated in section 4. In section 5 the observation
model that links the activity in a cortical voxel with the recorded EEG on the
scalp surface is presented. Section 6 describes the numerical method used
for integrating the huge system of random differential equations obtained.
Finally, sections 7 and 8 are devoted to a description of the simulations as
well as a discussion of the results.
2 Models for a Cortical Voxel and the Thalamus
In this work we model the neuronal activity in a cortical voxel by extending previous neural mass models that have been used to describe neural dynamics at smaller spatial scales. In particular, Jansen and Rit (1995)

Realistic Neural Mass Models

481

A

B

Figure 1: The basic neural mass models used. (A) Model for a cortical voxel. The
dynamics is obtained by the interaction of three populations of neurons: excitatory pyramidal cells, excitatory spiny stellate cells, and inhibitory interneurons
(smooth stellate cells). Input to the system is modeled by the pulse density
p(t). This reduces to Jansen’s model when removing the dashed-line loop. (B)
Model for the thalamus. Interaction between one excitatory and one inhibitory
subpopulation, representing thalamocortical and reticular-thalamic neurons,
respectively.

studied the temporal dynamics of a cortical column by means of the interaction of interconnected populations of excitatory pyramidal and stellate
cells as well as inhibitory interneurons. This model (see Figure 1A, except
for the dashed-line loop) capitalizes on the basic circuitry of the cortical
column (Mountcastle, 1978, 1997). Pyramidal cells receive feedback from

482

R. Sotero et al.

excitatory and inhibitory interneurons, which receive only excitatory
input from pyramidal cells. Nevertheless, at the spatial scale of voxels,
this simplified circuitry is no longer valid, but more complicated interactions need to be considered. While a cortical column has a diameter of 150 to
300 µm, the length of a voxel usually ranges from 1 to 3 mm, comprising several interconnected columns. At this spatial scale, pyramidal-to-pyramidal
connections become increasingly important, accounting for the majority of
¨ 1998). In our approach, Jansen’s
intracortical fibers (Braitenberg & Schuz,
model is extended to include this kind of connection by adding a selfexcitatory loop for the pyramidal population (see Figure 1B). Zetterberg
et al. (1978) had already used a generic model of this kind for describing
the temporal dynamics of a neuronal mass consisting of two excitatory
and one inhibitory population. Although they were able to produce signals
resembling EEG background activity, their model had no specific neural
substrate.
Usually in this type of modeling, the dynamics of each neuronal population is represented by two transformations (Jansen & Rit, 1995; Zetterberg
et al., 1978). First, the average pulse density of action potentials entering a
population is converted into an average postsynaptic membrane potential
by means of linear convolutions with impulse responses h e (t) and h i (t) for
the excitatory and the inhibitory case, respectively:
h e (t) = Aa te −a t
h i (t) = Bbte

−bt

(2.1)
.

(2.2)

Parameters Aand B represent the maximum amplitude of excitatory (EPSP)
and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSP), respectively, while lumped
parameters a and b depend on passive membrane time constants and other
distributed delays in the dendritic network.
The second (nonlinear) transformation accounts for the conversion of average membrane potentials of the population into an average pulse density
of action potentials, which is accomplished by means of a sigmoid function,

S(ν) =

2e 0
,
1 + e r (v0 −v)

(2.3)

where 2e 0 is the maximum firing rate, ν0 is the postsynaptic potential (PSP)
corresponding to firing rate e 0 , and parameter r controls the steepness of the
sigmoid function.
The interaction between the different populations is characterized by
five connectivity constants c 1 , c 2 , c 3 , c 4 , c 5 (see Figure 1A), which represent
the average number of synaptic contacts. The first four constants have the

Realistic Neural Mass Models

483

same interpretation as in Jansen and Rit (1995) and were related in that
work based on physiological arguments:
c 2 = 0.8c 1 , c 3 = c 4 = 0.25c 1 .

(2.4)

Similarly, c 5 accounts for interactions between pyramidal cells. Using
Laplace transforms, this convolution model can easily be expressed in terms
of the following system of differential equations:
y˙ 1 (t) = y4 (t)
y˙ 2 (t) = y5 (t)
y˙ 3 (t) = y6 (t)
y˙ 4 (t) = Aa { p(t) + c 5 S(y1 (t) − y2 (t)) + c 2 S(c 1 y3 (t))} − 2a y4 (t) − a 2 y1 (t)
y˙ 5 (t) = Bbc 4 S(c 3 y3 (t)) − 2by5 (t) − b 2 y2 (t)
y˙ 6 (t) = Aa S(y1 (t) − y2 (t)) − 2a y6 (t) − a 2 y2 (t),

(2.5)

where y1 (t), y3 (t) are average EPSP and y2 (t) is the average IPSP (see
Figure 1A).
From classical electrophysiology, pyramidal cells are considered to be
the main contributors to the measured EEG at the scalp surface. This is also
known to stem from two basic reasons: (1) the specific location of excitatory
and inhibitory synaptic inputs on the pyramidal neuron and (2) the spatial
organization of these cells in the form of a palisade oriented perpendicular
to the cortex (Niedermeyer & Lopes da Silva, 1987; Nunez, 1981). That is,
afferent excitatory connections make contact predominantly on apical dendrites, creating an extracellular negative potential (sink of current due to
Na + entering the cell), while inhibitory synapses reach mainly the soma of
the neuron, creating an extracellular positive potential (source of current
due to Cl − entering the cell). Thus, at a macroscopic level, the potential
field generated by a synchronously activated palisade of neurons behaves
like that of a dipole layer and can be considered the basis of EEG generation. Note that in our approach, y1 (t) and y2 (t) are the result of excitatory
and inhibitory synapses acting on the pyramidal cell population. Thus, the
difference y1 (t) − y2 (t) can be taken in a fairly good approximation to be
proportional to the EEG signal (Jansen & Rit, 1995).
The input to the model in Figure 1A is the process p(t), which represents
the basal stochastic activity within the voxel plus the extrinsic input. This
extrinsic input does not include afferences from voxels of the same and
other cortical areas, but it models specific stimulus-dependent input that
modulates the activity of the neuronal population.
Additionally, our approach capitalizes on specific properties of the thalamic nuclei in order to model the contribution of this subcortical structure,

484

R. Sotero et al.

which is the main relay station of the sensory input on its way to the cortex. That is, the thalamus comprises two major populations of neurons:
thalamocortical (TC) excitatory relay neurons and thalamic inhibitory reticular (RE) neurons. Only the axons of TC neurons project to the cortex,
while RE neurons form an inhibitory network that surrounds the thalamus
and project inhibitory connections to TC neurons exclusively (Destexhe &
Sejnowski, 2001). This circuitry allowed us to formulate the mass model
shown in Figure 1B, which Lopes da Silva et al. (1974) used for simulating
the alpha rhythm. Note that the model is used to describe the dynamics
of the thalamus as a whole, without taking into account any subdivision
into voxels. The motivation for this was the physical separation of the two
types of neuronal populations that form the thalamus. On the other hand,
the absence of any preferential orientation of the neurons in the thalamus,
together with the depth of this structure, has led to the idea that it does
not generate any measurable voltage at the scalp surface. Thus, in our approach, no direct thalamic contribution to the EEG is considered. A more
sophisticated model of the thalamic activity could be used to elucidate its
actual contribution to the EEG generation, but that would entail a detailed
knowledge of its microscopic cytoarchitectonic organization, which we lack
at the moment.

3 Short-Range versus Long-Range Interactions
If we want to model the dynamics of macroscopic cortical areas, we have
to augment the model described to account for the specific neuronal interactions in the brain. In the cytoarchitectonic organization of the cerebral
cortex, two types of connections can be distinguished: short-range and
long-range connections (SRC and LRC, respectively). SRCs are made by
cortical neurons with local branches that can reach a maximum of about
10 mm (Braitenberg, 1978; Abeles, 1991; Jirsa & Haken, 1997) corresponding
to the length of the longest horizontal axon collaterals plus the length of
the longest dendrites. LRCs are mainly formed by axons of pyramidal cells
that cross the white matter and connect cortical regions that can be up to
100 mm apart (Abeles, 1991; Jirsa & Haken, 1997).
Several differences between these two systems can be established, not
only in their characteristic lengths but also in their specificity and function
¨ 1998). While SRCs can be described in
(Abeles, 1991; Braitenberg & Schuz,
statistical terms, with an effective connection strength that diminishes exponentially with the distance between neuronal populations, LRCs do not
show such a regular and smooth pattern but have a high degree of specificity. Additionally, LRCs terminate preferentially on the apical dendrites of
pyramidal cells, while local collaterals terminate more on basal dendrites.
In the following sections, we describe how this differentiation of cortical
interactions is incorporated into our model.

Realistic Neural Mass Models

485

3.1 Within-Area Interactions. First, SRCs that mediate neuronal interactions within a cortical area will be described. A diagram of the proposed
augmented model for a given voxel is shown in Figure 2A. We assume
that voxels of the same area are coupled by means of both excitatory and
inhibitory connections, where the pyramidal cell population is the target
of all the input to the system. Excitatory input comes from pyramidal and
spiny stellate cell populations with coupling strengths described by connectivity functions that depend on the distance between voxels |xm − x j |
(Jirsa & Haken, 1996, 1997):
mj

ke1 =
mj

ke2 =

1 − |xmσ−x j |
e1
e
2σe1

(3.1)

1 − |xmσ−x j |
e2
e
.
2σe2

(3.2)
mj

mj

In equations 3.1 and 3.2, ke1 and ke2 are the strengths of the connections that
pyramidal cells and excitatory interneurons of voxel m make on pyramidal
cells of voxel j, respectively. Delays in these connections can be modeled by
linear transformations similar to equation 2.1, as in Jansen and Rit (1995).
We use h d2 (t) and h d3 (t), respectively:
h d2 (t) = Aa d2 te −a d2 t
h d3 (t) = Aa d3 te

−a d3 t

(3.3)
.

(3.4)

Similar equations are formulated for within-area inhibitory connections,
mj
which are considered by means of the connection strength ki that inhibitory interneurons (smooth stellate cells) of voxel m exert on pyramidal
cells of voxel j, that is,
1 − |xmσ−x j |
i
e
2σi

(3.5)

h d4 (t) = Bb d4 te −bd4 t .

(3.6)

mj

ki =

3.2 Between-Area Interactions. Interactions between distant cortical
areas are determined by LRCs, which in our approach are mediated by
pyramidal-to-pyramidal cell connections. There is no clarity about the rules
¨ 1998). Nevertheless,
governing the system of LRCs (Braitenberg & Schuz,
the emergence of new imaging techniques like diffusion weighted magnetic
resonance imaging (DWMRI) in the past few years has opened a window
to the study of this type of connection in the living human brain. DWMRI
is based on the fact that trajectories followed by water molecules during
diffusion processes reflect the microscopic environment of brain tissues.
Then nervous fibers can be characterized by tracing probabilistic paths

486

R. Sotero et al.

Figure 2: The thalamocortical model. (A) Input-output relationship for the neural mass model of a cortical voxel. A cortical voxel receives excitatory afferences
from pyramidal cells and excitatory stellate cells of voxels of the same area, from
pyramidal cells of other cortical areas, and from TC relay neurons. Inhibitory
afferences are received from inhibitory interneurons of voxels of the same area.
The pulse density p(t) accounts for the basal stochastic activity within the voxel.
(B) Input-output relationship for the neural mass model of the thalamus. TC
relay neurons send axonal projections to the cortex, where they make synapses
on the three populations of neurons considered. TC cells receive backward connections from cortical pyramidal neurons. The pulse density pth (t) accounts for
the background stochastic activity within the thalamus plus stimulus related
inputs.

Realistic Neural Mass Models

487

that represent the preferred direction of water diffusion along the nervous
fibers in each voxel. Finally, measures of anatomical connectivity reflecting
the interrelation between voxels and areas can be defined and calculated
based on these paths. In this article, the LRC strength K i,n between two
areas i and n will be estimated from actual DWMRI data.
Most work in the field of DWMRI has defined measures of betweenvoxel rather than between-areas anatomical connectivity. For example, for
characterizing the probability of connection of a point R with a point P, one
can use the number of probabilistic paths leaving P and entering R divided
by the number of probabilistic paths generated in P (Behrens et al., 2003;
Hagmann et al., 2003; Parker, Wheeler-Kingshott, & Barker, 2002; Koch,
Norris, & Hund-Georgiadis, 2002). In Tuch (2002) the probability of connection between two points is estimated as the probability of the most probable paths joining both points, while in Parker et al. (2002) and Tournier,
Calamate, Gadian, & Connelly, (2003), it is taken as the probability of the
path that minimizes a cost function depending on diffusion data. However,
diffusion data generally show high isotropy within the gray matter, giving
poor information about the distribution of nerve fibers. Consequently, in
most cases, it is not convenient to trace probabilistic paths within gray matter areas. Another approach for studying connectivity in the brain is to use
only the points at the boundaries of gray matter regions for characterizing
connection strengths between zones and not between the individual voxels
comprising them. In this line of work, Iturria-Medina, Canales-Rodr´ıguez
et al. (2005) and Iturria-Medina, Vald´es-Hern´andez et al. (2005) proposed a
model for obtaining anatomical connection strengths (ACS) between brain
zones. In their method, the ACS between two regions, A and B (C A↔B ),
was defined as being proportional to the cross-section area of the total
cylindrical-shaped volume of the nervous fibers shared by these regions.
ACS was then calculated as the area occupied by the connector volume over
the surfaces of the connected zones,
C A↔B = AT(A,B) + BT(A,B) ,

(3.7)

where AT( A,B) and BT( A,B) represent the area defined by fibers (both afferent
and efferent), joining A with B over the surface of A and B, respectively.
These areas were evaluated from a DWMRI data set by measuring the
number of target voxels on each surface of the generated probabilistic paths
that simulate fiber trajectories under the assumption that those paths are
contained inside the connector volume.
Notice that methods for reconstructing fiber paths using DWMRI data
cannot distinguish between excitatory and inhibitory connections. However, in the proposed model, LRCs are considered to be excitatory only.
This assumption is consistent with physiological and anatomical studies,
demonstrating, that pyramidal cells of layer III are the main source of the

488

R. Sotero et al.

feedforward projections to other cortical areas (Gilbert & Wiesel, 1979, 1983;
Martin & Whitteridge, 1984; McGuire, Gilbert, Rivlin, & Wiesel, 1991; Douglas & Martin, 2004). Thus, information obtained from DWMRI data can be
used as a measure of the CSP (K i,n ) between any two given areas i and n.
For modeling delays in long-range connections, we use
h d1 (t) = Aa d1 te −a d1 t .

(3.8)

Like parameters a and b of Jansen’s model, constants a d1 , a d2 , a d3 , and b d4
account for passive membrane time constants and other distributed delays
in the dendritic network.
4 Thalamocortical Model
In this section we present the final mathematical formulation of the thalamocortical model proposed, with SRCs and LRCs included.
As shown in Figure 2A, intra- and intervoxel interactions are described
by nine connectivity constants, from c 1 to c 9 . The first five constants, c 1 to c 5 ,
have already been defined in section 2. Constant c 6 represents the number
of synapses made by pyramidal cells of one voxel on voxels of other areas,
c 7 is the number of synapses made by pyramidal cells on voxels of the
same area, and constants c 8 and c 9 are the number of synapses made by
excitatory and inhibitory interneurons on pyramidal cells of voxels within
the same area. Thus, the dynamics of the neuronal activity in a cortical voxel
is described by a system of 16 differential equations:
nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

y˙ 1 (t) = y9 (t)
y˙ 2 (t) = y10 (t)
y˙ 3 (t) = y11 (t)
y˙ 4 (t) = y12 (t)
y˙ 5 (t) = y13 (t)
y˙ 6 (t) = y14 (t)
y˙ 7 (t) = y15 (t)
y˙ 8 (t) = y16 (t)
nj

nj

nj

nj

y˙ 9 (t) = Aa c 5 S y1 (t) − y2 (t) + c 2 S y3 (t) + K th,n c 3t S(x4 (t))


 Mn
mj
mj
ke1 c 7 S y6mn (t) + ke2 c 8 S (y7mn (t))
+ Aa

 m=1
m= j

Realistic Neural Mass Models

Mi

N

+

K i,n

c 6 S y5im (t)
m=1

i=1
i=n

nj

y˙ 10 (t) = Bb

489








nj

nj

mj

c 4 S y4 (t) +

ki c 9 S y8nm (t)
m=1
m= j

nj

nj

− 2a y9 (t) − a 2 y1 (t) + Aa p nj (t)

Mn




nj











nj

nj

− 2by10 (t) − b 2 y2 (t)

nj

nj

nj

y˙ 11 (t) = Aa c 1 S y1 (t) − y2 (t) + K th,n c 4t S(x5 (t)) − 2a y11 (t) − a 2 y3 (t)
nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

y˙ 12 (t) = Aa c 3 S y1 (t) − y2 (t) + K th,n c 5t S (x6 (t)) − 2a y12 (t) − a 2 y4 (t)
nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

nj

2
y˙ 13 (t) = Aa d1 S y1 (t) − y2 (t) − 2a d1 y13 (t) − a d1
y5 (t)
2
y˙ 14 (t) = Aa 21 S y1 (t) − y2 (t) − 2a d2 y14 (t) − a d2
y6 (t)
2
y˙ 15 (t) = Aa d3 S y3 (t) − 2a d3 y15 (t) − a d3
y7 (t)
2
y˙ 16 (t) = Bb d4 S y4 (t) − 2b d4 y16 (t) − b d4
y8 (t),

(4.1)

where the superscript nj refers to the voxel j in the area n. The system
has extrinsic inputs given by connections from other cortical voxels and the
thalamus as well as an intrinsic input p(t) that represents baseline stochastic
nj
nj
activity within the voxel. The output is taken as y1 (t) − y2 (t), which from
section 2 can be considered proportional to the generated EEG signal. Note
that close voxels separated by the boundary of two neighboring regions are
considered to be coupled through LRC solely, even if they are close enough
for the SRC to be important. This simplification can easily be avoided by
nj
nj
adding relevant terms to the equations for y˙ 9 and y˙ 10 in equation 4.1.
Nevertheless, in the calculations shown here, all anatomical areas were
chosen large enough and the activation regions within each area located
distant enough such that boundary effects could be neglected. This allowed
us to keep equations simple for the sake of a better understanding of the
model.
In the case of the thalamus, the main output of the system is mediated
by TC cells, which are assumed to send axonal projections to the three
populations of neurons in the cortex: pyramidal, spiny stellate, and smooth
stellate cells (see Figure 2). On the contrary, only pyramidal cells project
back to the thalamus and make synapses on TC neurons. This model is
described by the following set of 12 differential equations:
x˙ 1 (t) = x7 (t)
x˙ 2 (t) = x8 (t)

490

R. Sotero et al.

x˙ 3 (t) = x9 (t)
x˙ 4 (t) = x10 (t)
x˙ 5 (t) = x11 (t)
x˙ 6 (t) = x12 (t)
Mi

N

x˙ 7 (t) = At a t

c 6 S y5im (t) + pth (t) − 2a t x7 (t) − a t2 x1 (t)

K th,i
i=1

m=1

x˙ 8 (t) = Bt b t c 2t S (c 1t x3 (t)) − 2b t x8 (t) − b t2 x2 (t)
x˙ 9 (t) = At a t S(x1 (t) − x2 (t)) − 2a t x9 (t) − a t2 x3 (t)
2
x˙ 10 (t) = At a d1t S (x1 (t) − x2 (t)) − 2a d1t x10 (t) − a d1t
x4 (t)
2
x˙ 11 (t) = At a d2t S (x1 (t) − x2 (t)) − 2a d2t x11 (t) − a d2t
x5 (t)
2
x6 (t).
x˙ 12 (t) = At a d3t S (x1 (t) − x2 (t)) − 2a d3t x12 (t) − a d3t

(4.2)

The pulse density input pth (t) in this case can be modeled as the sum of a
stimulus (visual or auditory stimulation for example) and a basal random
activity in the thalamus.K th,i is the CSPs between the thalamus and the
cortical area i and is obtained from the anatomical connectivity matrix as
described in section 3.2.
At this point, it is worth making some comments about the mathematical formulation of systems 4.1 and 4.2. The two neural mass models
correspond to a mathematical object called random differential equation
(RDE) (Hasminskii, 1980 i.e., equations of the form d x(t) = f (x(t), p(t))dt,
where p(t) is an external stochastic process). Indeed, in equations 4.1
and 4.2, the nonautonomous inputs p nj (t) and pth (t) are external stochastic processes. Note that for each fixed realization of p nj (t) and pth (t),
the systems 4.1 and 4.2 are in fact nonautonomous ordinary differential equations. This approach differs from the neural mass models
proposed in Jansen and Rit (1995), Wendling et al. (2000), and David
and Friston (2003), which mainly use stochastic differential equations
(SDE) (i.e., equations of the form d x(t) = f (x(t))dt + g(x(t))dW(t), where
the differential dW(t) of the Wiener process W(t) is a gaussian white
noise).
Notice that the mathematical formulation of SDEs and RDEs is
quite different (Gard, 1988). However, both types of equations are
related in the particular case p(t) = W(t). That is, the RDE d x(t) =
f (x(t), p(t))dtcan be transformed into an SDE by adding the equation
d p(t) = d W(t). Hence, the framework of RDEs allows us to consider not
only Wiener process but also other types of modeling for the noise
p(t). Besides, numerical calculations can be significantly simplified by

Realistic Neural Mass Models

491

avoiding elements of stochastic integration theory usually required in
SDEs.
Finally, the existence and uniqueness of the solution of systems 4.1 and
4.2 follow from classical arguments. That is, given a realization of the
stochastic processes p nj (t) and pth (t), it is easily seen that the right-hand
side of systems 4.1 and 4.2 is given by continuously differentiable functions
of their respective arguments (for any choice of the corresponding parameters). Besides, function S (v(t)) defined in equation 2.3, the only source of
nonlinearity presented on both systems, satisfies a Lipchitz condition (it has
first derivative bounded). According to theorem 3.1 in Hasminskii (1980),
these two last conditions (continuity and Lipchitz) are enough to guarantee that our model is well posed (i.e., existence and uniqueness of the
solution).
5 EEG Observation Model
We now relate the average membrane potential of pyramidal cells of each
voxel to the observed EEG on the scalp surface.
The current dipole due to a PSP is approximately (H¨am¨al¨ainen, Hari,
Ilmoniemi, Knuutila, & Lounasmaa, 1993)
j=

π 2
d σin V = ε V
4

(5.1)

ε=

π 2
d σin ,
4

(5.2)

where d is the diameter of the dendrite, σin is the intracellular conductivity,
and V is the change of voltage during a PSP (for a single PSP j ≈ 20 fAm;
H¨am¨al¨ainen et al., 1993). The equivalent current dipole (ECD) due to N
PSPs is then
N

J =

N

αi ji ≈ ε
i=1

αi Vi ,

(5.3)

i=1

where αi is +1 for EPSP and −1 for IPSP. As discussed in section 2, we can
assume that for one voxel.
N

y1 (t) − y2 (t) =

αi Vi

(5.4)

i=1

and
J (t) = ε (y1 (t) − y2 (t)) .

(5.5)

492

R. Sotero et al.

On the other hand, from the forward problem of the EEG, we know that the
voltage measured at the scalp surface due to a current density distribution
is given by
φ(rs , t) =

K (rs , r g ) J (r g , t)d 3 r g .

(5.6)

where the kernel K (rs , r g ) is the electric lead field, which summarizes the
electric and geometric properties of the conducting media (brain, skull, and
scalp), and J (r g , t) is the primary current density (PCD) vector. The indices
s and g run over the sensor (electrodes) and generator (voxels) spaces,
respectively, and t denotes time. The lead field matrix K (rs , r g ) is commonly
known and can be calculated by means of the reciprocity theorem (Plonsey,
1963; Rush & Driscoll, 1969). Thus, the EEG generated due to the activation
of one voxel at a given array of electrodes distributed over the scalp surface
can easily be calculated by multiplication of the lead field by expression 5.5,
both evaluated for the given voxel.
6 Numerical Method
As we mentioned in section 4, an RDE is just a nonautonomous ordinary
differential equation (ODE) coupled with a stochastic process ( p(t) and
pth (t) in our model). Thus, in principle, RDEs can be integrated by applying
conventional numerical methods for ODEs. However, it is well known that
classical methods in ODEs may introduce “ghost” solutions and numerical
instabilities when applied to nonlinear equations, which is critical when
dealing with high-dimensional problems (as in our case). On the other
hand, very few researchers have studied systematically the properties of
such methods for the numerical integration of RDEs (Grune & Kloeden,
2001; Carbonell, Jimenez, Biscay, & de la Cruz, 2005). In this letter we
choose the local linearization (LL) for RDE (Carbonell et al., 2005) to solve
systems 4.1 and 4.2 (see a description of this method in the appendix). The
rationale for this choice is the fact that the LL method improves the order of
convergence and stability properties of conventional numerical integrators
(Carbonell et al., 2005) for RDEs. Moreover, the LL approach has been key
for constructing efficient and stable numerical schemes for the integration
and estimation of various classes of random dynamical systems (Shoji &
Ozaki, 1998; Prakasa-Rao, 1999; Schurz, 2002).
7 Results
In this section, computational simulations are used to demonstrate the capability of the model to reproduce the temporal dynamics and spectral
characteristics of the EEG signal as recorded on the scalp surface. A number of model predictions arising from the results obtained are also shown,

Realistic Neural Mass Models

493

Figure 3: (A) Average anatomical connectivity matrix estimated from diffusion
weighted magnetic resonance imaging data of two human subjects. This matrix
contains the connection strength between 71 brain areas. These areas were
segmented based on the Probabilistic Brain Atlas developed at the Montreal
Neurological Institute. The values are normalized between 0 and 1. (B) Random
matrix calculated with the same degree of sparseness as that of the anatomical
connectivity matrix in A.

and can be further tested experimentally. Additionally, the sensitivity of the
results to changes in model parameters is studied.
7.1 Description of the Simulation Method. In the simulations, 71 brain
areas were defined based on the Probabilistic MRI Atlas (PMA) produced
by the Montreal Neurological Institute (Evans et al., 1993, 1994; Collins,
Neelin, Peters, & Evans, 1994; Mazziotta, Toga, Evans, Fox, & Lancaster,
1995). Anatomical connectivity matrices between these areas, corresponding to two human subjects, were then calculated and averaged out. The
elements of the resultant average matrix were then used as CSP for betweenareas interactions. As shown in Figure 3, the sparseness of this anatomical
connectivity matrix allows for a significant reduction in the number of CSPs
and thus reduces the computational cost of solving the large RDE system
that describes the model presented here.
Initial conditions were set to zero in all simulations, and an integration
step size of 5 ms was used. The first 100 points of the simulated signals
were discarded in order to avoid transient behavior, and the input p(t)
was a gaussian process with mean and standard deviation of 10,000 and
1000 pulses per second, respectively. As for the rest of the model parameter
values, they were chosen to vary across space, with values taken from
a uniform distribution in the interval between 5% below and above the
standard values reported in Table 1. This choice was motivated by the
inhomogeneities found in cortical tissue. The motor cortex, for example,
has a relatively sparse population of neurons, while sensory cortices tend

494

R. Sotero et al.

Table 1: Values of Model Parameters and Physiological Interpretation.
Parameters with the Same Value in All Simulations
Parameter
A, B
e 0 , ν0 , r
σe1 , σe2 , σi
c6 , c7 , c8 , c9

Physiological Interpretation
Average synaptic gain for cortical
voxels
Parameters of the nonlinear
sigmoid function
Parameters of the connectivity
functions.
Average number of synaptic
contacts between the neuronal
populations of different cortical
voxels

Value
A = 3.25 mV, B = 22 mV
e 0 = 5 s−1 , ν0 = 6 mV
r = 0.56 mV−1
σe1 = 10, σe2 = 10, σi = 2
c 6 = 200, c 7 = 100
c 8 = 100, c 9 = 100

Parameters with Different Values for Each Simulation
Parameter
a, b
a d1 , a d2 , a d3 , b d4
c 1 , c 2 = 0.8c 1
c 3 = c 4 = 0.25c 1
c5
At , Bt
c 1t , c 2t , c 3t
c 4t , c 5t
a t , bt
Rhythm
Delta rhythm
Theta rhythm
Alpha rhythm

Beta rhythm
Gamma rhythm

Physiological Interpretation
Average synaptic time constants for excitatory and inhibitory
populations
Average time delay on efferent connection from a population for
cortical voxels
Average number of synaptic contacts between the neuronal
populations within a cortical voxel

Synaptic gain for the thalamus
Number of synaptic contacts made by the neuronal populations
of the thalamus
Average synaptic time constants for TC and RE populations
Actual Values Used in Each Case
a = 20 s−1 , b = 20 s−1 , a d1 = 15 s−1 , a d2 = 20 s−1 , a d3 = 20 s−1 ,
b d4 = 20 s−1 , c 1 = 50
a = 50 s−1 , b = 40 s−1 , a d1 = 15 s−1 , a d2 = 50 s−1 , a d3 = 50 s−1 ,
b d4 = 40 s−1 , c 1 = 50
a = 100 s−1 , b = 50 s−1 , a d1 = 33 s−1 , a d2 = 100 s−1 , a d3 = 100 s−1 ,
b d4 = 50 s−1 , c 1 = 150, At = 3.25 mV, Bt = 22 mV, c 1t = 50, c 2t =
50, c 3t = 80, c 4t = 100, c 5t = 80, a t = 100, b t = 40
a = 100 s−1 , b = 100 s−1 , a d1 = 33 s−1 , a d2 = 100 s−1 , a d3 =
100 s−1 , b d4 = 100 s−1 , c 1 = 180
a = 100 s−1 , b = 100 s−1 , a d1 = 33 s−1 , a d2 = 100 s−1 , a d3 =
100 s−1 , b d4 = 100 s−1 , c 1 = 250

Realistic Neural Mass Models

495

to be more densely populated than the average. Furthermore, even within
a given cytoarchitectonic region, cortical thickness and neuronal densities
vary considerably (Abeles, 1991). However, despite these differences, it
is believed that all cortical regions process information locally according
to the same principles. Parameter values will also depend on voxel size.
Nevertheless, because it is difficult to establish the exact nature of this
dependence, the selection of a plausible range of variation of parameter
values (see Table 1) was based on previous modeling studies (Lopes da
Silva et al., 1974; Zetterberg et al., 1978; Jansen & Rit, 1995; David & Friston,
2003). Parameters used in previous works and parameters introduced for
the first time in this study were then tuned so that the model could produce
the different rhythms observed in the human EEG.
In all simulations, our generator space consists of a 3D regular grid of
points that represent the possible generators of the EEG inside the brain,
while the measurement space is defined by the array of sensors where
the EEG is recorded. In this work, 41,850 grid points (defining voxels of
size 4.25 mm × 4.25 mm × 4.25 mm) and a dense array of 120 electrodes are
placed in registration with the PMA. The 3D grid is further clipped by the
gray matter, which consists of all 71 brain regions segmented (18,905 grid
points remaining). The electrodes’ positions were determined by extending
and refining the standard 10/20 system (FP1, FP2, F3, F4, C3, C4, P3, P4,
O1, O2, F7, F8, T3, T4, T5, T6, Fz, Cz, and Pz). The physical head model
constructed in this way allows us to easily compute the electric lead field
matrix that relates the PCD inside the brain to the voltage measured at the
sensors’ locations.
7.2 Generation of Alpha Rhythm. Experimental data from fMRI as well
as solutions of the EEG inverse problem show that generators of the different brain rhythms are not localized in the same cortical areas (Goldman,
Stern, Engel, & Cohen, 2002; Mart´ınez-Montes, Vald´es-Sosa, Miwakeichi,
Goldman, & Cohen, 2004). In the case of the alpha rhythm, it has been
demonstrated that increased EEG alpha power is correlated with decreased
fMRI signal in multiple regions of occipital, superior temporal, inferior
frontal, and cingulate cortex and with increased power in the thalamus
and insula (Goldman et al., 2002). In this study, these regions were segmented and subdivided into 12 anatomical areas selected from the PMA (see
Table 2), which were further subdivided based on their hemispheric location (left or right). An illustrative visualization of some of these regions with
the corresponding fiber tracts estimated from DWMRI is shown in Figure
4A.
The 24 defined brain areas together with their corresponding anatomical
connectivity values were used in our model to generate alpha activity;
the results are shown in Figure 5. The temporal dynamics and the power
spectrum of the signal at the electrodes of maximum amplitude (O1 and
O2) show reasonable agreement with experimentally observed EEG (see

496

R. Sotero et al.

Table 2: Brain Areas Selected for Each Rhythm Simulation.
Alpha Rhythm

Delta, Beta, Theta, and Gamma Rhythms

Cuneus (left and right)
Lingual gyrus (left and right)
Lateral occipitotemporal gyrus (left and
right)
Insula (left and right)
Inferior occipital gyrus (left and right)
Superior occipital gyrus (left and right)
Medial occipitotemporal gyrus (left and
right)
Occipital pole (left and right)
Cingulate region (left and right)
Inferior frontal gyrus (left and right)
Superior temporal gyrus (left and right)
Thalamus (left and right)

Medial front-orbital gyrus (left and right)
Middle frontal gyrus (left and right)
Precentral gyrus (left and right)
Lateral front-orbital gyrus (left and right)
Medial frontal gyrus (left and right)
Superior frontal gyrus (left and right)
Inferior frontal gyrus (left and right)

Figure 4: Visualization of the fiber tracts connecting the brain regions used in
the simulations as calculated from DWMRI. (A) Alpha rhythm: left and right
superior temporal gyri (1, 2); left and right thalamus (3, 4); left and right medial
occipitotemporal gyri (5, 6); left and right occipital poles (7, 8). (B) Beta, gamma,
delta, and theta rhythms: left and right superior frontal gyri (1, 2); left and right
inferior frontal gyri (3, 4).

Realistic Neural Mass Models

497

Figure 5: Simulation of alpha rhythm (8–12 Hz). (A) Temporal dynamics and
spectrum of the signal at electrodes O1 and O2. (B) Topographic distribution
of the alpha power on the scalp surface. The spatial distribution of the 120
electrodes’ system used in the simulation is also shown.

Figure 5A). The amplitude of the signal varies between 30 and 50 µV for
both electrodes, and the maximum of the spectrum was at 9.98 Hz for
electrode O1 and 9.90 Hz for electrode O2. These values are in the range of
actual recordings. Other qualitative properties, like the waxing and waning
characteristic of actual alpha rhythm, as well as interhemispheric symmetry,
are also observed. Regarding the topographic distribution of the activity,

498

R. Sotero et al.

Figure 6: Reactivity test simulation. A trapezoidal input of 12 seconds duration
and amplitude of 106 pulses per second is used to simulate visual input at the
thalamic level. The response of the system results in a significant reduction in
the amplitude of both the signal and the peak of the alpha power and a shift of
the power spectrum toward higher frequencies.

Figure 5B shows that the simulated EEG is maximal over the occipital
regions and diminishes in amplitude toward frontal areas, which has also
been described for alpha rhythm.
The influence of an external input (stimulus) on the simulated alpha
activity was also studied, and results are depicted in Figure 6. Actual
alpha rhythm is known to be temporarily blocked by an influx of light
(eye opening). This is known as reactivity. The degree of reactivity varies;
the alpha rhythm may be blocked, suppressed, or attenuated with voltage

Realistic Neural Mass Models

499

reduction (Niedermeyer & Lopes da Silva, 1987). In the simulations shown
in Figure 6, a trapezoidal input representing visual stimulation of 12 seconds duration and amplitude of 106 pulses per second was given to the
thalamus. As shown in the figure, the effect of this input was to attenuate
the EEG signal and shift the whole EEG spectrum toward higher frequencies with a reduction in the amplitude of the power, which is also observed
in actual reactivity tests.
7.3 Generation of Delta, Theta, Beta, and Gamma Rhythms. For the
simulation of delta, theta, beta, and gamma rhythms, 7 brain regions
(medial-front orbital gyrus, middle frontal gyrus, precental gyrus, lateralfront orbital gyrus, medial frontal gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, and inferior
frontal gyrus) were selected and subdivided based on their hemispheric location (left or right), for a total of 14 brain areas. Some of these areas, with
the corresponding fiber tracts connecting them, are shown in Figure 4B.
In these studies, 30 seconds of EEG data were simulated for each rhythm.
Figures 7, 8, 9, and 10 show the temporal dynamics and the spectrum of
the signal obtained at electrodes Fp1 and Fp2 for the delta, theta, beta,
and gamma rhythms simulations, respectively. Amplitudes and spectral
frequency bands obtained are within the range of experimentally observed
EEG. Note the characteristic interhemispheric asymmetry in the frequency
of the peak for the beta rhythm (see Figure 9). That is, the maximum of
the spectrum is located at 18.46 Hz for electrode Fp1 and at 16.76 Hz for
electrode Fp2. The rest of the simulated rhythms do not show a significant
interhemispheric frequency asymmetry. Finally note that the power spectrum on the scalp surface was maximum at frontal areas in all cases and
reaches minimum amplitudes at occipital electrodes.
7.4 Influence of the Model Parameters on the Generation of the EEG
Rhythms. Parameter values in Table 1 show that by increasing c 1 (and thus
c 2 , c 3 , and c 4 ), while keeping the other parameters constant, the EEG spectrum shifts toward higher frequencies, going from beta to gamma frequency
bands. On the other hand, keeping c 1 constant, we can switch from delta
to theta rhythm by increasing parameters associated with membrane time
constants and dendritic tree time delays. However, as there are 32 parameters in the model (excluding the connectivity matrix values), it is difficult
to study the influence of each of them on the output of the model. That
is, parameter values presented in Table 1 are not the only ones capable of
producing EEG rhythms. Additionally, neural mass models can produce
the same EEG rhythm with different sets of parameter values, as shown by
David and Friston (2003), which varied excitatory and inhibitory time constants and obtained regions of the parameters’ phase-space within which
the same rhythm was obtained. In this section, we perform similar analyses
for parameters a and b.

500

R. Sotero et al.

Figure 7: Simulation of delta rhythm (1–4 Hz). (A) Temporal dynamics and
power spectrum of the signal at electrodes Fp1 and Fp2. (B) Topographic distribution of the delta power on the scalp surface. The spatial distribution of the
120 electrodes’ system used in the simulation is also shown.

In the first set of simulations the areas involved in the alpha rhythm
simulation study were selected, and then parameters a , b were varied from
10 s−1 to 500 s−1 , with a step size of 10 s−1 , while the rest of the parameters
were kept constant with the values in Table 1 that correspond to alpha
rhythm. For each case, the resulting dynamics was assigned to an EEG

Realistic Neural Mass Models

501

Figure 8: Simulation of theta rhythm (4–8 Hz). (A) Temporal dynamics and
power spectrum of the signal at electrodes Fp1 and Fp2. (B) Topographic distribution of the theta power on the scalp surface. The spatial distribution of the
120 electrodes’ system used in the simulation is also shown.

band. A phase diagram is shown in Figure 11A. Two phases are obtained
depending on parameter values: one corresponding to alpha rhythms and
the other corresponding to noise.

502

R. Sotero et al.

Figure 9: Simulation of beta rhythm (12–30 Hz). (A) Temporal dynamics and
power spectrum of the signal at electrodes Fp1 and Fp2. (B) Topographic distribution of the theta power on the scalp surface. The spatial distribution of the
120 electrodes’ system used in the simulation is also shown.

In the second study, parameters a , b were also varied from 10 s−1 to
500 s−1 with a step size of 10 s−1 , but now the brain areas selected were the
ones involved in the generation of delta, theta, beta, and gamma rhythms.
As in the previous case, the other parameters were kept constant with the
values shown in Table 1 for beta rhythm. The corresponding phase diagram

Realistic Neural Mass Models

503

Figure 10: Simulation of gamma rhythm (30–70 Hz). (A) Temporal dynamics
and power spectrum of the signal at electrodes Fp1 and Fp2. (B) Topographic
distribution of the gamma power on the scalp surface. The spatial distribution
of the 120 electrodes’ system used in the simulation is also shown.

is shown in Figure 11B. As can be seen, five different phases are obtained
corresponding to delta, theta, beta, and gamma rhythms, as well as noise.
However, alpha rhythm (the small spots in white between theta and beta
areas in Figure 11B) was also obtained for three pairs of values (b, a ):
(340,180), (340,190), (120,280).

504

R. Sotero et al.

Figure 11: Phase-space diagram of the average synaptic time constants for
excitatory (a ) and inhibitory (b) populations. (A) The chosen regions were the
ones used previously in the alpha rhythm simulation. The phase space splits into
two regions that separate noise from alpha rhythm. (B) The selected areas were
the ones used in delta, theta, beta, and gamma rhythm simulations. The phase
space splits into different regions—one for each rhythm and noise. Nevertheless,
for three pairs of values (b, a ), alpha rhythm was also obtained (white points
between theta and beta areas). (C) The same areas as in A were selected but with
values extracted from the random matrix of Figure 3B. (D) The same areas as in
B but with values extracted from the random matrix. In C and D, for very large
physiologically unrealistic values of (b, a ), several rhythms appear.

Thus, by changing a or b, or both, the system undergoes phase transitions
that allow the same model to generate the different EEG rhythm. Note also
that, as expected, in both sets of simulations, noise is obtained for high
values of a or b, or both, which corresponds to processes decaying very
rapidly and thus occurring at very high (nonphysiological) frequencies.
One of the main goals of this article is the validation of the use of anatomical connectivity information obtained from DWMRI to model the LRC
strength between multiple coupled neural mass models representing cortical areas and the capability of this modeled system to generate different EEG
rhythms. So far, we have proven that our model is capable of generating
alpha, delta, theta, beta, and gamma rhythm in a wide range of parameter
values. Nevertheless, an important question remains: How important is the

Realistic Neural Mass Models

505

Figure 12: Effect of the reduction of connectivity parameters on alpha and beta
rhythms. CSPs between areas were diminished by 50%, and parameter c 1 was
also diminished to c 1 = 50. The dotted line is the spectrum when using the
standard values, and the solid line represents the reduced parameters.

use of the actual connectivity matrix values? In other words, wouldn’t be
possible to generate EEG rhythms with a completely different connectivity
matrix?
To elucidate this matter, the two sets of simulations previously described
were replicated, but in this case, the random connectivity matrix shown
in Figure 3B was used instead for the coupling between the brain areas
involved in the simulations. This random matrix was generated with the
same degree of sparseness as the actual connectivity matrix. Results are
shown in Figures 11C and 11D. As can be seen, no rhythm emerged for
the range of values (b, a ) from 10 s−1 to 500 s−1 in these cases. Only for
extremely high and nonphysiological values (corresponding to average
population time constants of less than 1 ms) are some rhythms obtained.
An interesting case is to analyze the impact of decreased connection
strengths (see section 8). For this, the values of the anatomical connectivity
matrix were decreased 50% and parameter c 1 was reduced to c 1 = 50 for
the cases of the alpha and beta rhythms generation models. The results are
shown in Figure 12. For both alpha and beta, the peak amplitude of the
power spectrum reduces for its corresponding frequency bands, while the
delta and theta bands were accentuated.
8 Discussion
In this work, previous neural mass models (Lopes da Silva et al., 1974;
Zetterberg et al., 1978; Jansen & Rit, 1995) were generalized and combined
to account for intravoxel interactions, as well as short-range and long-range
connections representing interactions between cortical voxels within the
same area and with voxels of other cortical areas, respectively. The thalamus

506

R. Sotero et al.

was also described by a neural mass model and coupled to the cortical areas.
Anatomical information from DWMRI was introduced to constrain coupling strength parameters between different brain regions. This allowed us
to couple multiple brain areas with real anatomical connectivity values and
study the rhythms emerging from these interactions across different spatial
scales. Knowing the average depolarization of pyramidal cells in each voxel
and the lead field matrix that characterizes the spatial distribution of the
electromagnetic field in the head, we obtained the voltage signals recorded
at the location of given electrodes on the scalp surface.
For validating the model, several simulations were carried out. The parameters that were tuned in each simulation were the time delays of efferent
connections and connectivity constants between the different populations
within a voxel. The choice of parameter was given by its importance in
the generation of different rhythms, as demonstrated by previous work in
this field (Jansen & Rit, 1995; David & Friston, 2003). The temporal dynamics and the spectrum of human EEG rhythms were reproduced by the
proposed model. EEG rhythms were also obtained at the right spatial locations. In the case of alpha rhythm, the activity was maximal at occipital
electrodes and diminished toward the frontal electrodes. Delta, theta, beta,
and gamma rhythms were maximal at frontal electrodes. The amplitudes
of the rhythms were also within the range observed in actual EEG recordings. Interhemispheric symmetry was found in the case of alpha rhythm,
since the difference between the peaks of EEG spectrum at electrodes O1
and O2 was less than 0.1 Hz. In contrast beta rhythm showed interhemispheric asymmetry; that is, there was a difference of 1.7 Hz between the
peaks of the EEG spectrum at Fp1 and Fp2. For delta, theta, and gamma
rhythms, interhemispheric symmetry with respect to the peak frequency of
the spectrum was obtained. In clinical practice, no EEG is complete without a reactivity test (Niedermeyer & Lopes da Silva, 1987). For this reason,
we made a reactivity test simulation, finding that the effect of stimulation
was to shift the spectrum toward higher frequencies together with a reduction in amplitude, which also agrees with actual EEG recordings in healthy
subjects.
Instead of the anatomical connectivity matrix, values from a random
matrix were also used to couple brain areas. In this case, some rhythms
appear for extremely high values of parameters a and b. However, these
values of a and b correspond to an average population time constant of less
than 1 ms, which does not make much sense from the physiological point of
view. Thus, it can be concluded that in the range of physiologically plausible
values, no rhythm was obtained when using a nonrealistic connectivity
matrix.
Finally, the model was used to study the effect of a reduction in all
connectivity parameters values predicting an increase in delta and theta
power (see Figure 12), along with a decrease in alpha and beta peaks. It is

Realistic Neural Mass Models

507

interesting to note that this slowing of oscillatory activity is a prominent
functional abnormality that has been reported in EEG and MEG studies of
Alzheimer disease (AD) patients (Coben, Danziger, & Berg, 1983; Penttil¨a,
Partanen, Soininen, & Riekkinen, 1985; Schreiter-Gasser, Gasser, & Ziegler,
1993; Berendse, Verbunt, Scheltens, van Dijk, & Jonkman, 2000). On the
other hand it is also recognized that AD patients show a progressive cortical disconnection syndrome due to the loss of large pyramidal neurons in
cortical layers III and V (Pearson, Esiri, Hiorns, Wilcock, & Powell, 1985;
Morrison, Scherr, Lewis, Campbell, & Bloom, 1986). Related to this, it has
also been found that the total callosal area is significantly reduced in patients suffering from this pathology (Rose et al., 2000; Hampel et al., 1998).
According to our model, the shift of the EEG spectrum toward low frequencies found in AD could be associated with the cortical disconnection
syndrome that is reflected in the decreased values of the coupling strength
parameters, although the model does not exclude contributions from other
mechanisms.
As we know, lumped models are simplifications of actual brain structures, so further improvements could be made by including more realistic
models in order to describe a wider range of phenomena. Another limitation of our approach is that DWMRI cannot distinguish between efferent
and afferent fibers (this is reflected in the symmetry of the connectivity
matrix; see Figure 3A), and connectivity values thus could be overestimated. Moreover, the validity of the connectivity matrix values depends
on the assumption that probabilistic paths calculated based on the information obtained from DWMRI reflect the actual connections between brain
areas.
While this letter focused on the EEG forward problem, the next logical
step is the estimation of the parameters of this model from data. Previous
work has accomplished this task. For example, in Valdes et al. (1999), the
neural mass model described in Zetterberg et al. (1978) was fitted to actual
EEG alpha data. In that work, the LL approach was used to discretize Zetterberg’s model, which was then reformulated in a state-space formalism that
could be integrated by using a nonlinear Kalman filter scheme. A maximum
likelihood procedure was then employed to estimate the model parameters
for several EEG data sets. Bayesian inference, dynamic causal modeling
(Friston, Harrison, & Penny, 2003; David, Harrison, Kilner, Penny, & Friston, 2004), and genetic algorithms (Jansen, Balaji Kavaipatti, & Markusson,
2001) have also been used for estimating the parameters of neural mass
models of the type presented here. A more ambitious goal is the integration
of EEG with functional imaging techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography. The use of this model
as a framework in which electrical, hemodynamic, and metabolic activities
can be coupled is currently under study and will be the subject of a future
publication.

508

R. Sotero et al.

Appendix: Local Linearization Method for RDE
Assume that a k-dimensional random process p(t), t ∈ [t0 , T] and a nonlinear function f are given, and define the d-dimensional RDE:
dy(t) = f (y(t), p(t))dt
y(t0 ) = y0 .
Then, given a step size h,the local linearization scheme that solves numerically the equation above at the time instants tn = t0 + nh, n = 0, 1, . . . , is
given by
yn+1 = yn + Le Cn h R,
where L = [Id , 0d x2 ], R = [01x(d+1) , 1]T , and the (d + 2) × (d + 2) matrix Cn
is defined by blocks as



f˙ y (t)(yn , p(tn )) f˙ p (t)(yn , p(tn )) p(tn+1 h)− p(tn ) f (yn , p(tn ))

Cn = 
0
0
1
0
0
0
Here, f˙ y (t) and f˙ p (t) denote the derivatives of f with respect to the variables
y and p, respectively.
Due to the high dimensionality of our problem, the main task in the implementation of the LL scheme is the computation of the matrix exponential
e Cn h . The use of the Krylov subspace methods (Sidje, 1998) is strongly recommended for that purpose. Indeed, that method can be used to compute
the vector v = e Cn h R, and then the operation Lv reduces to take the first d
elements of v.
Acknowledgments
We thank Trinidad Virues, Elena Cuspineda, and Thomas Wennekers for
helpful comments.
References
Abeles, M. (1991). Corticonics: Neural circuits of the cerebral cortex. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Behrens, T., Johansen-Berg, H., Woolrich, M. W., Smith, S. M., WheelerKingshott, C., Boulby, P. A., Barker, G. J., Sillery, E. L., Sheehan, K., Ciccarelli, O.,
Thompson, A. J., Brady, J. M., & Matthews, P. M. (2003). Non-invasive mapping
of connections between human thalamus and cortex using diffusion imaging.
Nature Neuroscience, 6, 750–757.

Realistic Neural Mass Models

509

Berendse, H. W., Verbunt, J. P., Scheltens, P., van Dijk, B. W., & Jonkman, E. J. (2000).
Magnetoencephalographic analysis of cortical activity in Alzheimer’s disease: A
pilot study. Clin. Neurophysiol., 111, 604–612.
Braitenberg V. (1978). Cortical architectonics: General and areal. In M. A. B. Brazier
and M. Petche (Eds.), Architectonics of the cerebral cortex (pp. 443–465). New York:
Raven Press.
¨ A. (1998). Cortex: Statistics and geometry of neuronal connecBraitenberg, V., & Schuz,
tivity. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Carbonell, F., Jimenez, J. C., Biscay, R. J., & de la Cruz, H. (2005). The local linearization
method for numerical integration of random differential equations. BIT Numerical
Mathematics, 45(1), 1–14.
Coben, L. A., Danziger, W. L., & Berg, L. (1983). Frequency analysis of the resting
awake EEG in mild senile dementia of Alzheimer type. Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol., 55, 372–380.
Collins, D. L., Neelin, P., Peters, R. M., & Evans, A. C. (1994). Automatic 3D intersubject registration of MR volumetric in standardized Talairach space. J. Comp.
Assist. Tomog., 18, 192–205.
David, O., & Friston, K. J. (2003). A neural mass model for MEG/EEG: Coupling and
neuronal dynamics. NeuroImage., 20, 1743–1755.
David, O., Harrison, L., Kilner, J., Penny, W., & Friston, K. J. (2004). Studying effective connectivity with a neural mass model of evoked MEG/EEG responses. In
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Biomagnetism BIOMAG 2004 (pp.
136–138). Boston.
Destexhe, A., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2001). Thalamocortical assemblies: How ion channels,
single neurons, and large-scale networks organize sleep oscillations. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Douglas, R. J., & Martin, K. A. C. (2004). Neuronal circuits of the neocortex. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci., 27, 419–51.
Evans, A. C., Collins, D. L., Mills, S. R., Brown, E. D., Kelly, R. L & Peters, T. M.
(1993). 3D statistical neuroanatomical models from 305 MRI volumes. Proc. In
IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference (pp. 1813–1817).
London: MTP Press.
Evans, A .C., Collins, D. L., Neelin, P., MacDonald, D., Kamber, M., & Marrett,
T. S., 1994. Three-dimensional correlative imaging: Applications in human brain
mapping. In: Thatcher, R., Hallet, M., Zeffiro, T., John, E. R., & Huerta, M.
(Eds.), Functional Neuroimaging: Technical Foundations. Academic Press, New York,
pp. 145–161.
Friston, K. J., Harrison, L., & Penny, W. (2003). Dynamic causal modelling. NeuroImage, 19, 1273–1302.
Gard, T. C. (1988). Introduction to stochastic differential equations. New York: Marcel
Dekker.
Gilbert, C. D., & Wiesel, T. N. (1979). Morphology and intracortical projections of
functionally characterised neurones in the cat visual cortex. Nature, 280, 120–125.
Gilbert, C. D., & Wiesel, T. N. (1983). Functional organization of the visual cortex.
Prog. Brain Res., 58, 209–218.
Goldman, R. I., Stern, J. M., Engel, J., & Cohen, M. S. (2002). Simultaneous EEG and
fMRI of the alpha rhythm. NeuroReport, 13(18), 2487–2492.

510

R. Sotero et al.

Grune, L., & Kloeden, P. E. (2001). Pathwise approximation of random ordinary
differential equation. BIT, 41, 711–721.
Hagmann, P., Thiran, J. P., Jonasson, L., Vandergheynst, P., Clarke, S., Maeder, P.,
& Meuli, R. (2003). DTI mapping of human brain connectivity: Statistical fibre
tracking and virtual dissection. NeuroImage, 19, 545–554.
H¨am¨al¨ainen, M., Hari, R., Ilmoniemi, R. J., Knuutila, J., & Lounasmaa, O. V. (1993).
Magnetoencephalography—theory, instrumentation and applications to noninvasive studies of the working human brain. Rev. Modern Phys., 65, 413–497.
Hampel, H., Teipel, S. J., Alexander, G. E., Horwitz, B., Teichberg, D., Schapiro, M. B.,
& Rapoport, S. I. (1998). Corpus callosum atrophy is a possible indicator of regionand cell type–specific neuronal degeneration in Alzheimer disease: A magnetic
resonance imaging analysis. Arch. Neurol., 55, 193–198.
Hasminskii, R. Z. (1980). Stochastic stability of differential equations. Alphen aan den
Rijn, The Netherlands: Sijthoff Noordhoff.
Iturria-Medina, Y., Canales-Rodr´ıguez, E., Meli´e-Garc´ıa, L., & Vald´es-Hern´andez, P.
(2005). Bayesian formulation for fiber tracking. Presented at the 11th Annual Meeting
of the Organization for Human Brain Mapping, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Iturria-Medina, Y., Vald´es-Hern´andez, P., & Canales-Rodriguez, E. (2005). Measures
of anatomical connectivity obtained from neuro diffusion images. Presented at the
11th Annual Meeting of the Organization for Human Brain Mapping, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
Jansen, B. H., Balaji Kavaipatti, A., & Markusson, O. (2001). Evoked potential enhancement using a neurophysiologically-based model. Methods of Information in
Medicine, 40, 338–345.
Jansen, B. H., & Rit, V. G. (1995). Electroencephalogram and visual evoked potential
generation in a mathematical model of coupled cortical columns. Biol. Cybern.,
73, 357–366.
Jansen, B. H., Zouridakis, G., & Brandt, M. E. (1993). A neurophysiologically-based
model of flash visual evoked potentials. Biol. Cybern., 68, 275–283.
Jirsa, V. K., & Haken, H. (1996). Field theory of electromagnetic brain activity. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 77(5), 960–963.
Jirsa, V. K., & Haken, H. (1997). A derivation of a macroscopic field theory of the
brain from the quasi-microscopic neural dynamics. Physica D, 99, 503–526.
Koch, M. A., Norris, D. G., & Hund-Georgiadis, M. (2002). An investigation of
functional and anatomical connectivity using magnetic resonance imaging. NeuroImage, 16, 241–250.
Lopes da Silva, F. H., Hoeks, A., Smits, H., & Zetterberg, L. H. (1974). Model of brain
rhythmic activity: The alpha-rhythm of the thalamus. Kybernetik, 15, 27–37.
Martin, K. A. C., & Whitteridge, D. (1984). Form, function and intracortical projections of spiny neurones in the striate visual cortex of the cat. J. Physiol, 353,
463–504.
Mart´ınez-Montes, E., Vald´es-Sosa, P. A., Miwakeichi, F., Goldman, R. I., & Cohen,
M. S. (2004). Concurrent EEG/fMRI analysis by multiway partial least squares.
NeuroImage, 22, 1023–1034.
Mazziotta, J. C., Toga, A., Evans, A. C., Fox, P., & Lancaster, J. (1995). A probabilistic
atlas of the human brain: Theory and rationale for its development. Neuroimage,
2, 89–101.

Realistic Neural Mass Models

511

McGuire, B. A., Gilbert, C., Rivlin, P. K., & Wiesel, T. N. (1991). Targets of horizontal connections in macaque primary visual cortex. J. Comp. Neurol., 305, 370–
392.
Morrison, J. H., Scherr, S., Lewis, D. A., Campbell, M. J., & Bloom, F. E. (1986).
The laminar and regional distribution of neocortical somatostatin and neuritic
plaques: Implications for Alzheimer’s disease as a global neocortical disconnection syndrome. In A. B. Scheibel, A. F. Weschler (Eds.), The biological substrates of
Alzheimer’s disease (pp. 115–131). New York: Academic Press.
Mountcastle V. B. (1978). An organizing principle for cerebral function. In G. M.
Edelman, V. B. Mountcastle (Eds.), The mindful brain (pp. 7–50). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Mountcastle, V. B. (1997). The columnar organization of the neocortex. Brain, 120,
701–722.
Niedermeyer, E. & Lopes da Silva, F. (1987). Electroencephalography: Basic principlesclinical applications and related fields (2nd ed.). Baltimore: Urban & Schwarzenberg.
Nunez, P. L. (1981). Electric fields of the brain. New York: Oxford University Press.
Parker, G. J., Wheeler-Kingshott, C. A., & Barker, G. J. (2002). Estimating distributed
anatomical connectivity using fast marching methods and diffusion tensor imaging. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 21(5), 505–512.
Pearson, R. C. A., Esiri, M. M., Hiorns, R. W., Wilcock, G. K., & Powell, T. P. S.
(1985). Anatomical correlates of the distribution of the pathological changes in
the neocortex in Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 82, 4531–4534.
Penttil¨a, M., Partanen, J. V., Soininen, H., & Riekkinen, P. J. (1985). Quantitative analysis of occipital EEG in different stages of Alzheimer’s disease. Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol., 60, 1–6.
Plonsey, R. (1963). Reciprocity applied to volume conductors and the ECG. IEEE
Trans. BioMedical Electronics, 10, 9–12.
Prakasa-Rao, B. L. S. (1999). Statistical inference for diffussion type processes. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Rinzel, J., Terman, D., Wang, X.-J., & Ermentrout, B. (1998). Propagating activity
patterns in large-scale inhibitory neuronal networks. Science, 279, 1351–1355.
Rose, S. E., Chen, F., Chalk, J. B., Zelaya, F. O., Strugnell, W. E., Benson, M.,
Semple, J., & Doddrell, D. M. (2000). Loss of connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease:
An evaluation of white matter tract integrity with colour coded MR diffusion
tensor imaging. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, 69, 528–530.
Rush, S., & Driscoll, D. A. (1969). EEG electrode sensitivity–an application of reciprocity. IEEE Trans on Biomed. Eng., 16(1), 15–22.
Schreiter-Gasser, U., Gasser, T., & Ziegler, P. (1993). Quantitative EEG analysis in
early onset Alzheimer’s disease: A controlled study. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., 86, 15–22.
Schurz H. (2002). Numerical analysis of stochastic differential equations without
tears. In D. Kannan & V. Lakahmikamtham (Eds.), Handbook of stochastic analysis
applications (pp. 237–358). New York: Marcell Dekker.
Shoji, I., & Ozaki, T. (1998). Estimation for nonlinear stochastic differential equations
by a local linearization method. Stochast. Anal. Appl., 16, 733–752.
Sidje, R. B. (1998). EXPOKIT: Software package for computing matrix exponentials.
AMC Trans. Math. Software, 24, 130–156.

512

R. Sotero et al.

Tournier, J. D., Calamante, F., Gadian, D. G., & Connelly, A. (2003). Diffusionweighted magnetic resonance imaging fibre tracking using a front evolution
algorithm. NeuroImage, 20, 276–288.
Traub, R. D., & Miles, R. (1991). Neuronal networks of the hippocampus. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Tuch, D. (2002). Diffusion MRI of complex neural architecture. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Valdes, P. A., Jim´enez, J. C., Riera, J., Biscay, R., & Ozaki, T. (1999). Nonlinear EEG
analysis based on a neural mass model. Biol. Cybern., 81, 415–424.
van Rotterdam, A., Lopes da Silva, F. H., van den Ende, J., Viergever, M. A., &
Hermans, A. J. (1982). A model of the spatial temporal characteristic of the alpha
rhythm. Bull. Math. Biol., 44, 238–305.
Wang, X.-J., Golomb, D., & Rinzel, J. (1995). Emergent spindle oscillations and intermittent burst firing in a thalamic model: Specific neuronal parameters. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 5577–5581.
Wendling, F., Bellanger, J. J., Bartolomei, F., & Chauvel, P. (2000). Relevance of nonlinear lumped-parameter models in the analysis of depth-EEG epilectic signals.
Biol. Cybern., 83, 367–378.
Wilson, H. R., & Cowan, J. D. (1972). Excitatory and inhibitory interactions in localized populations of model neurons. Biophys. J., 12, 1–24.
Zetterberg, L. H., Kristiansson, L., & Mossberg, K. (1978). Performance of a model
for a local neuron population. Biol. Cybern., 31, 15–26.

Received December 20, 2005; accepted June 9, 2006.

