Single-Column Thalamocortical Network Model
Exhibiting Gamma Oscillations, Sleep Spindles, and
Epileptogenic Bursts

Roger D. Traub, Diego Contreras, Mark O. Cunningham, Hilary Murray, Fiona
E. N. LeBeau, Anita Roopun, Andrea Bibbig, W. Bryan Wilent, Michael J.
Higley and Miles A. Whittington
J Neurophysiol 93:2194-2232, 2005. First published 3 November 2004; doi:10.1152/jn.00983.2004
You might find this additional info useful...
This article cites 258 articles, 130 of which can be accessed free at:
/content/93/4/2194.full.html#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 30 other HighWire hosted articles, the first 5 are:
Dendritic Excitability and Gain Control in Recurrent Cortical Microcircuits
Etay Hay and Idan Segev
Cereb. Cortex, September 9, 2014; .
[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]

The Cell-Type Specific Cortical Microcircuit: Relating Structure and Activity in a
Full-Scale Spiking Network Model
Tobias C. Potjans and Markus Diesmann
Cereb. Cortex, March , 2014; 24 (3): 785-806.
[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
Regulation of epileptiform discharges in rat neocortex by HCN channels
Asher J. Albertson, Sidney B. Williams and John J. Hablitz
J Neurophysiol, October 15, 2013; 110 (8): 1733-1743.
[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
A Neocortical Delta Rhythm Facilitates Reciprocal Interlaminar Interactions via Nested
Theta Rhythms
Lucy M. Carracedo, Henrik Kjeldsen, Leonie Cunnington, Alastair Jenkins, Ian Schofield,
Mark O. Cunningham, Ceri H. Davies, Roger D. Traub and Miles A. Whittington
J. Neurosci., June 26, 2013; 33 (26): 10750-10761.
[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
Updated information and services including high resolution figures, can be found at:
/content/93/4/2194.full.html
Additional material and information about Journal of Neurophysiology can be found at:
http://www.the-aps.org/publications/jn

This information is current as of February 20, 2015.

Journal of Neurophysiology publishes original articles on the function of the nervous system. It is published 12 times a year
(monthly) by the American Physiological Society, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD 20814-3991. Copyright © 2005 by the
American Physiological Society. ISSN: 0022-3077, ESSN: 1522-1598. Visit our website at http://www.the-aps.org/.

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

Neuronal Ensemble Synchrony during Human Focal Seizures
Wilson Truccolo, Omar J. Ahmed, Matthew T. Harrison, Emad N. Eskandar, G. Rees
Cosgrove, Joseph R. Madsen, Andrew S. Blum, N. Stevenson Potter, Leigh R. Hochberg and
Sydney S. Cash
J. Neurosci., July 23, 2014; 34 (30): 9927-9944.
[Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]

J Neurophysiol 93: 2194 –2232, 2005.
First published November 3, 2004; doi:10.1152/jn.00983.2004.

Single-Column Thalamocortical Network Model Exhibiting Gamma
Oscillations, Sleep Spindles, and Epileptogenic Bursts
Roger D. Traub,1 Diego Contreras,2 Mark O. Cunningham,3 Hilary Murray,3 Fiona E. N. LeBeau,3
Anita Roopun,3 Andrea Bibbig,1 W. Bryan Wilent,2 Michael J. Higley,2 and Miles A. Whittington3
1

Departments of Physiology and Pharmacology, and Neurology, State University of New York, Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York;
Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and 3School of Biomedical
Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom

2

Submitted 20 September 2004; accepted in final form 3 November 2004

INTRODUCTION

The greatest scientific challenge, perhaps, in all of brain
research is how to understand the cooperative behavior of large
Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: R. D. Traub at
Departments of Physiology and Pharmacology, and Neurology, State University of New York, Downstate Medical Center, 450 Clarkson Ave., Box 31,
Brooklyn, NY 11203 (E-mail: roger.traub@downstate.edu).
2194

numbers of neurons. Such cooperative behavior is necessary
for sensory processing and motor control, planning, and in the
case of humans, at least, for thought and language. Yet it is a
truism to observe that single neurons are complicated little
machines, as well as to observe that not all neurons are
alike—far from it; and finally to observe that the connectional
anatomy and synaptology of complex networks, in the cortex
for example, have been studied long and hard, and yet are far
from worked out. Any model, even of a small bit of cortex, is
subject to difficulties and hazards: limited data, large numbers
of parameters, criticisms that models with complexity comparable to the modeled system cannot be scientifically useful, the
expense and slowness of the necessary computations, and
serious uncertainties as to how a complex model can be
compared with experiment and shown to be predictive.
The above difficulties and hazards are too real to be dismissed readily. In our opinion, the only way to proceed is
through a state of denial that any of the difficulties need be
fatal. The reader must then judge whether the results, preliminary as they must be, help our understanding.
Previous models of cortical or thalamocortical circuits have
been developed, usually with specific applications in mind (Bal
et al. 2000; Bazhenov et al. 2002, 2004; Bush and Sejnowski
1996; Contreras et al. 1996; Destexhe et al. 1996, 1999;
Douglas and Martin 1991; Golomb and Amitai 1997; Lytton et
al. 1997; Pinto et al. 2003; Wang and Rinzel 1993). These
previous models tend to use small numbers of cells and usually
represent each cell with one or a few compartments. We are not
aware of a previous model that has a multiplicity of cell types
and firing behaviors in cortical cells, including regular spiking
(RS), fast rhythmic bursting (FRB) (Gray and McCormick
1996; Steriade et al. 1998), and intrinsic bursting (IB) (McCormick et al. 1982; Nowak et al. 2003). It has been unusual
to include electrical coupling, particularly between the axons
of principal cells, a form of coupling that appears to be
essential for persistent gamma and for very fast oscillations
(Ͼ70 Hz) (Cunningham et al. 2004a,b; Traub et al. 2002,
2003a,b).
We have attempted here to construct a thalamocortical
circuit model that has applicability to the study of a range of
emergent behaviors in the thalamocortical network. Our attempt hinges on an effort to be faithful to a range of intrinsic
properties in different neuronal types (Llina´s 1988) and to
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment
of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement”
in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

0022-3077/05 $8.00 Copyright © 2005 The American Physiological Society

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

Traub, Roger D., Diego Contereas, Mark O. Cunningham, Hilary
Murray, Fiona E. N. LeBeau, Anita Roopun, Andrea Bibbig, W.
Bryan Wilent, Michael Higley, and Miles A. Whittington. Singlecolumn thalamocortical network model exhibiting gamma oscillations, sleep spindles, and epileptogenic bursts. J Neurophysiol 93:
2194 –2232, 2005. First published November 3, 2004; doi:10.1152/
jn.00983.2004. To better understand population phenomena in
thalamocortical neuronal ensembles, we have constructed a preliminary network model with 3,560 multicompartment neurons (containing soma, branching dendrites, and a portion of axon). Types of
neurons included superficial pyramids (with regular spiking [RS] and
fast rhythmic bursting [FRB] firing behaviors); RS spiny stellates; fast
spiking (FS) interneurons, with basket-type and axoaxonic types of
connectivity, and located in superficial and deep cortical layers; low
threshold spiking (LTS) interneurons, which contacted principal cell
dendrites; deep pyramids, which could have RS or intrinsic bursting
(IB) firing behaviors, and endowed either with nontufted apical
dendrites or with long tufted apical dendrites; thalamocortical relay
(TCR) cells; and nucleus reticularis (nRT) cells. To the extent possible, both electrophysiology and synaptic connectivity were based on
published data, although many arbitrary choices were necessary. In
addition to synaptic connectivity (by AMPA/kainate, NMDA, and
GABAA receptors), we also included electrical coupling between
dendrites of interneurons, nRT cells, and TCR cells, and—in various
combinations— electrical coupling between the proximal axons of
certain cortical principal neurons. Our network model replicates
several observed population phenomena, including 1) persistent
gamma oscillations; 2) thalamocortical sleep spindles; 3) series of
synchronized population bursts, resembling electrographic seizures;
4) isolated double population bursts with superimposed very fast
oscillations (Ͼ100 Hz, “VFO”); 5) spike-wave, polyspike-wave, and
fast runs (about 10 Hz). We show that epileptiform bursts, including
double and multiple bursts, containing VFO occur in rat auditory
cortex in vitro, in the presence of kainate, when both GABAA and
GABAB receptors are blocked. Electrical coupling between axons
appears necessary (as reported previously) for persistent gamma and
additionally plays a role in the detailed shaping of epileptogenic
events. The degree of recurrent synaptic excitation between spiny
stellate cells, and their tendency to fire throughout multiple bursts,
also appears critical in shaping epileptogenic events.

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

J Neurophysiol • VOL

APPENDIX B describes between-cell interactions, both synaptic
and by electrical coupling. APPENDIX C deals with technical
issues of how the large computations were carried out.
A note on terminology: sleep spindles refer to a well-known
in vivo population phenomenon (Steriade 2001, 2003), appearing in natural slow-wave sleep in addition to other states, and
consisting of cellular oscillations (about 10 to about 15 Hz,
depending on species) that involve thalamic relay cells, nucleus reticularis thalami (nRT) cells, and cortical cells. Network phenomena in vitro, which exhibit a similar appearance
in terms of cellular oscillations, shall be called simply “spindles.”

METHODS

Simulation methods
We confine ourselves here to general comments on our philosophy
of modeling and the overall network architecture. Specific details on
single-cell properties are described in APPENDIX A; on synaptic and
gap-junctional interactions (connectivity, kinetics, and conductance
amplitudes) in APPENDIX B; and on programming issues and the use of
the parallel computer in APPENDIX C. [In addition, interested readers
may obtain copies of the Fortran code and Linux compilation and
execution scripts by writing to roger.traub@downstate.edu.]
The approach to modeling single neurons grew out of 2 earlier
studies (Traub et al. 1994, 2003c ). The code described in the latter
reference was the basis for simulating 2 of the cell types here. The
approach is to use an electrotonic architecture containing dozens of
compartments, but nowhere near the number of compartments used to
model an anatomically reconstructed neuron. Network simulations, on
a large scale anyway, are not practical with such detailed neurons.
Dozens of compartments are sufficient to capture certain aspects of
neuronal function, including differences in electrogenesis between
axon, soma, and dendrites; action potential initiation in the axon;
dendritic calcium spikes and bursts; spike backpropagation; and to
allow for axons and/or dendrites to be electrically coupled between
neurons.
The structure of a particular neuron is described by its compartmental topology; the values of electrotonic parameters such as specific
membrane capacitance, membrane resistivity, and internal resistivity
(some of which can be different in the axon compared with soma/
dendrites); the densities of a fixed repertoire of ionic conductances,
where the same repertoire of conductances was used, for the sake of
simplicity, in all cell types; and by parameters describing the kinetics
of [Ca2ϩ] concentration in a thin submembrane shell. Again for the
sake of simplicity, the first-order kinetic scheme for submembrane
[Ca2ϩ] concentration was the same for all cell types; only the
particular parameters were different. Submembrane [Ca2ϩ] concentration is used to gate the slow AHP conductance, and (along with
membrane voltage) one of the fast K conductances—the “C” conductance. All neurons of a given type (e.g., layer 2/3 RS pyramidal
neurons) have the same parameter set: heterogeneity can be introduced by the use of slightly different bias currents. A final simplification is to use, wherever possible, identical kinetics for voltagesensitive channels between different neuron types. Exceptions to this
latter rule include the use of different fast gNa and delayed rectifier
gK(DR) kinetics in pyramidal cells versus cells with stellate or interneuron-like morphology; and the use of different T-channel kinetics in
nRT versus thalamocortical relay (TCR) neurons. Our experience has
been that using 50 to 100 or so compartments is sufficient to capture
many detailed aspects of neuronal firing behavior (Traub et al. 1994,
2003c).
The “standard repertoire” of active ionic conductances are these:
fast, transient, gNa; persistent gNa; K conductances of delayed rectifier,
A (transient, inactivating), slow AHP, C (fast voltage- and calcium-

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

include a variety of between-cell interactions, both chemical
synaptic and gap junction-mediated. Although the model does
indeed describe, predictively, several sorts of network behaviors (as will be seen below), it is insufficient to describe many
others: for reasons that include, but are not limited to, the
omission of many cell types, the requirement to make many
guesses about structural details, the absence of mechanisms to
simulate synaptic plasticity (either short-term or long-term),
and the restriction of the model to a single column. In particular, the present model is best suited to address the physiology
of network oscillations and epileptogenesis.
A major question to be addressed here concerns the role of
axonal gap junctions (Schmitz et al. 2001) in epilepsy. A
number of experimental studies suggest a role of gap junctions
in epileptogenesis (Gajda et al. 2003; Jahromi et al. 2002;
Ko¨hling et al. 2001; Pais et al. 2003; Perez-Velazquez et al.
1994; Ross et al. 2000; Schweitzer et al. 2000; Szente et al.
2002; Traub et al. 2001, 2002). Earlier modeling studies of
hippocampal pyramidal cell networks (Traub et al. 1999)
predicted that gap junctions, if located between the axons of
pyramidal cells, are expected to have 2 effects on epileptogenesis: 1) they would lower the extent of recurrent chemical
synaptic excitation required for population synchronization of
bursts of action potentials; 2) they would introduce a very fast
oscillation (Ͼ70 Hz, “VFO”) on top of the interictal field
potential. [Earlier studies of such a superimposed very fast
oscillation in hippocampus (Snow and Dudek 1984) had considered the possibility of field-effect–induced synchronization.] In the cortex, VFO is of interest not only because of its
association with human epilepsy (Bragin et al. 1999; Staba et
al. 2004), but also because of the appearance of VFO in
somatosensory evoked potentials in rat barrel cortex (Jones and
Barth 1999, 2002; Jones et al. 2000).
We have paid particular attention to electrical coupling
between principal cell axons because of the necessity to include such an effect, to account for experimental recordings of
kainate-induced persistent gamma in superficial layers of auditory cortex in vitro (Cunningham et al. 2004), and also
because of clinical data documenting, in human epilepsy patients, the presence of VFO superimposed on seizure burst
complexes, and on interictal spikes (Traub et al. 2001): earlier
work in hippocampus (Traub and Bibbig 2000) had shown that
the postulate of axonal coupling between hippocampal pyramidal cells could account for the occurrence of VFO on top of
physiological sharp waves (Ylinen et al. 1995), even though
the sharp waves are primarily mediated by a synaptically
coupled network. Further details suggesting that axonal coupling could occur in cortex are discussed in APPENDIX B.
Topics covered in this paper include: kainate-induced persistent gamma oscillations and sleep spindles; then epileptogenesis, with illustrations of patterns resembling interictal
spikes, fast runs, spike-wave, and polyspike-wave. These topics were selected because they are logically related: they are all
associated with slow sleep oscillations, and its transition to
seizures, in vivo (Steriade 2003). We include some experimental recordings that are consistent with some of the model
predictions, particularly on the presence of very fast oscillations superimposed on epileptiform field potentials, and on
firing patterns of layer 4 spiny stellate cells during seizurelike
events. Further topics are considered in the appendices. APPENDIX A describes how individual cell types were modeled.

2195

2196

TRAUB ET AL.

dependent), “K2,” and “M” types; high- and low-threshold gCa; and a
relatively slow anomolous rectifier, or “h,” conductance.
The cell types and cell locations of the 3,560-neuron model are
shown in Fig. 1. The cortical portion of the model is one-dimensional,
the dimension being cortical depth: dimensions parallel to the pia are
not represented, so that the structure can be thought of as a column.
Space is not defined within the thalamic portion. The reader should
note the following: there is no layer 1; layers 2 and 3 are lumped
together; a large variety of neuronal types are omitted, including but
not limited to: neurogliaform cells, double bouquet cells, multipolar
bursting neurons (Blatow et al. 2003), and numerous other sorts of
interneurons; there are no pyramidal cells in layer 4; synaptic inhibition in layer 4 derives primarily from deep interneurons; there are no
FRB cells in deep layers nor FRB interneurons (which were shown to
exist by Steriade et al. 1998); there is homogeneity of cell structure
within layers. Considerations in choosing the repertoire that we used
were these: we began with a model of layer 2/3 circuitry that included
RS and FRB pyramidal cells, as well as superficial fast-spiking (FS)

J Neurophysiol • VOL

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. 1. General architecture of the model. All neurons are multicompartmental, with soma, branching dendrites, and a short branching axon. Thalamic
portion of the network contains (a) 100 nucleus reticularis thalami (nRT) cells
[each with low-threshold gCa, and lacking intrinsic gamma oscillatory properties (Contreras et al. 1993; Pinault and Descheˆnes 1992)], as well as (b) 100
“typical” thalamocortical relay (TCR) cells [i.e., also lacking intrinsic gamma
oscillations (Steriade et al. 1993)]. Cortical portion contains the following cell
types: (c) 500 layer 6 nontufted pyramidal neurons that connect intracortically,
as well as to nRT and TCR neurons (the only model cortical cells to connect
to the thalamus); (d) 100 deep fast-spiking (FS) basket interneurons, 100 deep
axoaxonic interneurons, 100 deep low threshold spiking (LTS) dendritecontacting interneurons; (e) 800 layer 5 tufted intrinsic bursting (IB) pyramidal
neurons and 200 layer 5 tufted regular spiking (RS) pyramidal neurons; (f) 240
layer 4 spiny stellate cells, the major (but not only) recipients of thalamic
inputs; (g) 1,000 layer 2/3 RS pyramidal cells and 50 layer 2/3 fast rhythmic
bursting (FRB) pyramidal cells; (h) 90 superficial basket interneurons, 90
superficial axoaxonic interneurons, and 90 LTS interneurons.

and low-threshold spiking (LTS) interneurons (Cunningham et al.
2004a). We needed layer 4 stellate cells as the major recipient of
thalamic inputs. Tufted pyramids in layer 5 are a major neuronal type,
much studied, and important for cortical outputs not headed for the
thalamus; and both IB and occasionally RS firing patterns have been
described in these cells (Williams and Stuart 1999). Layer 6 pyramids
were needed as an interface to the thalamus. Deep interneurons were
necessary because, for among other reasons, we know that in vitro
gamma/beta oscillations have different structure in deep versus superficial layers (A. Roopun and M. A. Whittington, unpublished data).
Finally, both nRT and TCR thalamic neurons are essential for the
understanding of thalamic oscillations, including sleep spindles, as
presented here, but also for subsequent work including delta waves
and the slow (Ͻ1 Hz) oscillation of sleep (Steriade et al. 1993).
APPENDIX A provides further details on the structure of the individual
cell models and illustrates examples of some of their firing behaviors,
considered as single neurons in isolation from other neurons.
The neurons were connected together 1) by chemical synapses,
using AMPA and NMDA receptors, and ␥-aminobutyric acid-A
(GABAA; but not GABAB) receptors; and 2) gap junctions, that were
nonrectifying and voltage-independent. Connections of both sorts
were “wired up” randomly, subject to constraints on how many
connections there were, and the possible locations of postsynaptic
compartments. A given excitatory synapse activated both ␣-amino-3hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and N-methylD-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Gap junctions were located between
dendrites of cortical interneurons, of nRT cells (Landisman et al.
2002), and of TCR cells (Hughes et al. 2002a). Gap junctions could
also be located between the axons of 1) the pool of superficial
pyramids, RS and FRB; and/or 2) the pool of spiny stellates; and/or 3)
the pool of layer 5 tufted pyramids; and/or 4) the pool of layer 6
nontufted pyramids. It was a major assumption that only homologous
sorts of glutamatergic neurons could be electrically coupled by their
axons (see APPENDIX B).
We justified the use of axonal coupling as follows: 1) it is necessary
in models for the occurrence of gamma oscillations (Cunningham et
al. 2004a); 2) spikelets occur in cortical neurons (Cunningham et al.
2004a; Descheˆnes,1981; Thomson and Bannister 2004; however, the
Descheˆnes study attributed the spikelets to synaptic activation); 3)
there is staining for pannexin 2 [a putative component of the electrical
coupling substrate between axons (Bruzzone et al. 2003)] throughout
cortical layers 2– 6 (Cunningham et al. 2004a); 4) very fast oscillations occur in the cortex (Traub et al. 2001; this paper).
Certain important state variables could not be included, such as
fluctuations in extracellular ion concentrations. In addition, we did not
allow for afferent inputs (coming from outside the model network), or
for specific effects of neuromodulators on membrane properties,
although we did depolarize selected neuronal subpopulations (including FRB neurons, and at times pyramidal neurons in layers 5 and 6),
using steady bias currents. All collective behaviors simulated are thus
essentially “autonomous” in the model network.
The effects of the many simplifications made here will become
known as progressively more detailed models are constructed and
their behaviors analyzed. It is to be hoped that—as the model
incorporates further cell types, membrane currents, metabotropic
effects, more accurate synaptic connectivity, and so forth—then it will
be possible to study a broader range of network phenomena, including
the slow oscillation of sleep, gamma oscillations in deep cortical
layers, and cortical responses to thalamic activation.
In APPENDIX B, we list the set of “baseline” synaptic conductance
scaling constants. These, and details of connectivity, were arrived at
after extensive (dozens) of preliminary simulations. (Many dozens of
preliminary simulations were also necessary for each individual cell
model.) Then, for this paper, we can list modifications in synaptic
conductances relative to the baseline values. APPENDIX B also describes
between-cell connectivity (synaptic and gap junctional), methods for

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

estimating field potentials, and other matters related to ensemble
activity.
APPENDIX C describes computer science and numerical integration
aspects of how our large calculations were performed on a parallel
computer (Linux cluster). (For questions about these issues and copies
of the code, or portions thereof, the reader can contact roger.
traub@downstate.edu.)
The parameters of greatest interest in the RESULTS will be these:
which populations of cortical principal cells are electrically coupled;
how cortical inhibitory postsynaptic conductances (IPSCs) are scaled;
steady depolarizing currents to particular subpopulations of neurons;
the properties of AMPA and NMDA conductances at synapses between layer 4 spiny stellate cells; the effects on cortical activity of
disconnecting the thalamus.

In vitro experimental methods

In vivo experimental methods
Experiments were conducted in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the National Institutes of Health and with the approval of the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of
Pennsylvania. Adult male Sprague–Dawley rats (350 – 450 g) were
anesthetized with pentobarbital (50 mg/kg intraperitoneally). Buprenorphine (0.03 mg/kg subcutaneously) was administered to provide additional analgesia. Animals were paralyzed with gallamine
triethiodide and artificially ventilated. End-tidal CO2 (3.5–3.7%) and
heart rate were continuously monitored. Body temperature was maintained at 37°C by servocontrolled heating blanket and rectal thermometer (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA). The depth of anesthesia was
maintained by supplemental doses of the same anesthetic to keep a
constant heart rate and a constant high-amplitude, low-frequency
electroencephalogram (EEG) as recorded from a bipolar electrode
inserted into the cortex.
For cortical intracellular recordings, a craniotomy was made to
expose the surface of the barrel cortex (1.0 –3.0 mm posterior to
bregma, 4.0 –7.0 mm lateral to the midline). The dura was resected
over the recording area and mineral oil was applied to prevent
dessication. The stability of recordings was improved by drainage of
the cisterna magna, hip suspension, and filling of the holes made for
recording with a solution of 4% agar.
Intracellular recordings were performed with glass micropipettes
filled with 3 M potassium acetate and DC resistances of 80 –90 M⍀.
A high-impedance amplifier (band-pass of 0 –5 kHz) with active
bridge circuitry (Cygnus Technology, Delaware Water Gap, PA) was
J Neurophysiol • VOL

used to record and inject current into the cells. Data were digitized at
10 kHz and stored on a Nicolet Vision (Nicolet Instrument Technologies, Madison, WI). A computer operating Labview (National Instruments, Austin, TX) was used for the on-line averaging of responses. All data analysis was done off-line using routines written in
Igor Pro (Wavemetrics, Lake Oswego, OR).
RESULTS

Persistent gamma oscillation
Persistent, or pharmacologically induced, gamma oscillations occur in in vitro preparations and are called “persistent”
because, once initiated, they continue as long as the slice
remains healthy (Fisahn et al. 1998). In rat auditory cortex in
vitro, kainate-induced gamma oscillations have their maximal
amplitude in superficial layers (Cunningham et al. 2004a).
Interestingly, two other sorts of in vitro gamma oscillations
have maximal amplitude in the superficial layers: interneuron
gamma evoked by stimulating metabotropic glutamate receptors, during pharmacological blockade of ionotropic glutamate
receptors (Whittington et al. 1995); and thalamically evoked
cortical gamma oscillations in thalamocortical slices in vitro
(Metherate and Cruikshank 1999). [Not all gamma oscillations
in vitro follow this rule, however: when gamma is evoked in
somatosensory cortex in vitro, with carbachol plus a low
concentration of kainate, then the gamma occurs in all cortical
layers, with deep gamma 180° out of phase with superficial
gamma (Buhl et al. 1998).]
Our earlier model of auditory cortex kainate-induced persistent gamma (Cunningham et al. 2004a) involved simulations of
layer 2/3 only, with RS and FRB pyramidal cells, FS interneurons (basket and axoaxonic), and LTS interneurons. Electrical
coupling, between axons, occurred within and between RS and
FRB pyramidal cell populations; dendritic electrical coupling
occurred between FS interneuron dendrites and between LTS
interneuron dendrites. As in earlier models of persistent
gamma in hippocampus (Traub et al. 2000, 2003a,b), the
superficial neocortical model produced gamma as a result of
axonal spiking percolating through the principal cell axonal
plexus (in the neocortical case, having such spiking boosted by
FRB bursting), with resultant bursts of orthrodromic activation
of interneurons, and with the interneurons then interrupting the
principal cell somata and axons for some tens of milliseconds,
by GABAergic inhibition, thereby producing the gamma period.
Figure 2 demonstrates persistent gamma in a full-thickness
model of neocortex (the thalamus being disconnected here),
one that includes the cell types of the original superficial
cortical model, but many other cell types as well: layer 4 spiny
stellates, deep pyramids, deep interneurons. Different bias
currents were applied to some of the neurons, particularly to
superficial FRB neurons (see legend). (This applies to other
simulations as well.) As before (compare Cunningham et al.
2004a), gamma is of highest amplitude in the superficial layers
(Fig. 2A); and cells in the superficial layers have similar firing
patterns to the previous model, and to in vitro experiment:
sporadic somatic firing of superficial RS pyramids on a background of rhythmic synaptic potentials (Fig. 2B), superficial
FRB pyramids discharging on approximately every other burst,
superficial FS interneurons (e.g., the basket cell shown in
bottom right panel) firing on a majority of the gamma waves,

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

Horizontal slices (450 ␮m thick) were prepared from adult male
Wistar rats (150 –250 g). Neocortical slices containing primary and
secondary auditory regions and secondary parietal regions were maintained at 34°C at the interface between warm wetted 95% O2-5% CO2
and artificial cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) containing (in mM): KCl 3;
NaH2PO4 1.25; MgSO4 1; CaCl2 1.2; NaHCO3 24; glucose 10; NaCl
126. Extracellular recordings from primary auditory cortex were
obtained by using glass micropipettes containing artificial CSF (resistance Ͻ0.5 M⍀). Intracellular recordings were obtained with sharp
microelectrodes filled with potassium acetate (resistance 30 –90 M⍀),
and, in some cases, with the addition of 2% biocytin. For identification
of biocytin-filled cells, slices were immediately fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in phosphate-buffered saline, following the recording. Signals were analog filtered at 2 kHz and digitized at 10 kHz.
Cells other than those in layer 4 were identified by physiological
criteria (regular spiking, fast spiking, intrinsic bursting). Slices were
bathed in 400 nM kainate (Tocris, Bristol, UK) and 40 ␮M picrotoxin
(Tocris). In some cases, CGP55845A (10 ␮M, Sigma-Aldrich UK,
Dorset, UK) was added as well, to block GABAB receptors. All
procedures were carried out in accordance with the UK Animals
(Scientific Procedures) Act of 1986.

2197

2198

TRAUB ET AL.

1984b; Contreras et al. 1993; Descheˆnes et al. 1984) (APPENDIX
model thalamic cells can generate rhythmic bursts at approximately 5 Hz during injection of a steady current (not
shown). Figure 3 shows a simulated thalamic network spindle
and its influence on the cortex. The spindle is initiated by a
spontaneous burst in the reticular neurons (Fig. 3A). The
spindle has a frequency of about 16 Hz (slightly above the
frequency range for sleep spindles in cats, but at the upper limit
for humans), and has a waxing/waning course (seen in the TCR
average in Fig. 3A). The relatively fast spindle frequency
shown here may be related to the relatively rapid time constants used for the decay of nRT cell-induced GABAA receptor-mediated IPSCs in TCR cells: 3.3 and 9 ms for the fast and
slow components, respectively (APPENDIX B).
Interestingly, the spindle in Fig. 3 stops on its own; in the
model case, cessation occurs without time- or calcium-dependent h-current kinetics in TCR neurons (Lu¨thi and McCormick
1998). Note that individual TCR neurons exhibit the expected
sawtooth-like voltage fluctuations (resulting from rebound
low-threshold calcium spikes), and each neuron fires on only a
fraction of the waves. In contrast, nRT neurons discharge a
burst on each spindle wave, as occurs in both in vivo (Contreras et al. 1993) sleep spindles and in vitro (Bal et al.
1995a,b) spindles. The nRT neurons do not, however, show a
tonic depolarization as seen in vivo [perhaps attributable in part
to persistent gNa (Contreras and Steriade 1993)]; the model
nRT neurons instead exhibit the slight tonic hyperpolarization
that usually occurs in vitro in ferret slices (Bal et al. 1995a,b).
[There are exceptions, however: sometimes nRT neurons in
vitro do exhibit an underlying depolarization during a spindle
oscillation, sustained by a persistent sodium conductance (Kim
and McCormick 1998).] This spindle is generated entirely
within the thalamic portion of the model, as corticothalamic
excitatory postsynaptic conductances (EPSCs) (AMPA) in
TCR (after the initial wave) are at most 0.2 nS.
Figure 3B illustrates the effects of the thalamic spindle on
spiny stellate neurons: a series of synaptic depolarizations,
sometimes with action potentials. Note further the coherent
depolarizations in the spiny stellate cells, as shown in the
middle trace in Fig. 3B, an inverted average of the somatic
potentials of all layer 4 spiny stellates; this coherence is aided
by the electrical coupling between spiny stellate axons used in
the simulation. In addition, a small burst occurs (Fig. 3, B and
C, *); this burst results because of the strong recurrent chemical synaptic excitation between the spiny stellates; when the
coupling is weakened 8-fold, the burst does not occur (not
shown). Multiphasic waves similar to the asterisk-marked burst
in Fig. 3C, are on occasion observed in in vivo sleep spindles
(Contreras and Steriade 1996; see also Beierlein et al. 2002).
Figure 3C shows (top portion) that cortical neurons, layer 5
tufted IB pyramids in particular, actually “see,” at spindle
frequency, a superimposition of synaptic excitation and inhibition; the inhibition results in the model because of strong
feedforward excitation of interneurons by thalamic afferents
(Swadlow 2003). Trains of IPSPs have been observed experimentally in vivo on the depolarizing phase of the slow oscillation in cortical neurons (Steriade et al. 1993).
Finally, Fig. 3C illustrates the behavior of superficial layer
2/3 RS pyramids, including the average of all of the layer 2/3
pyramids (note that the average signal is inverted, so as to
approximate a local field potential). During the spindle itself,
A);

and superficial LTS interneurons firing less than the FS cells.
This simulation, however, is not sufficient to explain why the
deep layers are not generating their own gamma, or at least
being driven more strongly by the superficial gamma. The
explanation could lie in differences in gap junctional connectivity between the two regions, in properties of interlaminar
synaptic connections, in the model’s lack of deep FRB neurons, or in other structural features. It is important to note that
in vivo (in recordings from cat pericruciate gyri, anterior and
posterior suprasylvian areas, and area 18 of the marginal
gyrus), gamma oscillations occur in both superficial and deep
layers with comparable amplitude (Steriade et al. 1996). In
addition, FRB cells have been recorded in the infragranular
layers of cat pericruciate and suprasylvian gyri (Steriade et al.
1998) and of cat primary visual cortex (J. Cardin and D.
Contreras, unpublished data).
Sleep spindles generated in the thalamic network
Individual model thalamic relay cells, and model reticular
neurons, fire in bursting and tonic modes, as occurs physiologically (Bal and McCormick 1993; Jahnsen and Llina´s 1984a
J Neurophysiol • VOL

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. 2. Simulation of kainate-induced gamma oscillations. A: fields in
superficial and deep sites, with corresponding power spectra. Note that the
oscillations are generated in superficial layers. B: firing patterns of selected
neurons (compare Cunningham et al. 2004a). (LTS interneuron traces are
shown in red, basket cell traces in black; tufted RS trace is blue; nontufted RS
trace is red.) This simulation was run with inhibitory postsynaptic conductances (IPSCs) 1.25 ϫ baseline, and with “open” axonal gap junctions between
cortical principal cells (conductance 4 nS for deep pyramids, and 3 nS for
superficial pyramids and spiny stellates). Depolarizing currents were 0.25–
0.35 nA for FRB neurons and were Ͻ0.1 nA for all other cortical principal
cells.

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

2199

there is a mixture of spindle intervals (about 16 Hz) and
gamma intervals (about 30 Hz); gamma is possible in the
superficial layers because, in this simulation, superficial pyramids are electrically coupled by their axons. As the spindle
ends, gamma alone is present. In vivo as well (in cats) sleep
spindles are often followed by a run of gamma oscillation
(Steriade et al. 1996), although the gamma in vivo is in both
cortex and thalamus. In our model, the gamma is only in the
cortex. This difference from in vivo results may arise because
the model does not include a mechanism for sustained depolarization of nRT and TCR neurons, such as occurs during the
slow oscillation in vivo (Contreras and Steriade 1995; their
Figs. 4 and 8), and which may be mediated by metabotropic
glutamate receptors (Blethyn et al. 2003; Hughes et al. 2002),
and/or by a persistent sodium conductance (Kim and McCormick 1998).
Our simulated spindles require synaptic interactions between
nRT and TCR cells. Figure 4 shows that when nRT cells are
isolated from other neurons—layer 6 pyramids and TCR neurons— but are not isolated from each other, then there is no
spindling, either in the nRT population or elsewhere. (All other
parameters in the simulation of Fig. 4 were as for Fig. 3.)
Superficial layers (Fig. 4B) show continuous gamma oscillations. This model behavior corresponds to the behavior seen
with the in vitro ferret slice model of spindles of Bal et al.
(1995a,b), but is different from what has been described in
vivo, wherein an isolated portion of nucleus reticularis appears
to spindle on its own (Steriade et al. 1987). The model as now
J Neurophysiol • VOL

FIG. 4. Under the conditions of Fig. 3, but with nucleus reticularis isolated
(i.e., corticoreticular connections are cut, as are connections from nRT neurons
to TCR neurons, and vice versa), spindling does not occur. A: 3 superimposed
TCR somatic voltages, the inverted average of all TCR somatic potentials, and
an nRT somatic potential (as in Fig. 3A). B: cortical field potentials, somatic
potential of a superficial RS pyramid and of a layer 4 spiny stellate cell. There
are, in this simulation, continuous gamma oscillations in cortical superficial
layers (note fields in B), reflecting the axonal coupling between pyramidal
neurons there. Requirement for nRT/TCR interactions in this model for
spindling to occur appears to be similar to in vitro ferret data (von Krosigk et
al. 1993), and different from what has been reported for the cat in vivo
(Steriade et al. 1987); but see Fig. 5.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. 3. Simulation of thalamic spindle, with its effects on the cortex. In this case, the corticothalamic input is small [peak ␣-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) conductance Ͻ0.2 nS in a TCR neuron during the spindle proper, i.e., after the first burst], so that the spindle is generated
intrathalamically. Note (A) the spindlelike appearance in the mean behavior of thalamic neurons (waxing and waning), the intermittent firing of individual TCR
neurons, and the bursting of the nRT cell on each spindle wave. [Compare with, for example, the sleep spindle in a decorticated, ketamine–xylazine anesthetized
cat; Fig. 11 of Timofeev and Steriade (1996).] Spindle induces nearly simultaneous excitatory postsynaptic conductances (EPSCs) and IPSCs in cortical neurons
(B, C) by the TCR excitation of both principal cells and interneurons. * marks the occurrence of a small synchronized burst among spiny stellates, dependent
on the strong recurrent connections between spiny stellate cells in this simulation; complex synaptic potentials appear in other cortical neurons (e.g., tufted layer
5 IB pyramidal cell in C), coincident with the small burst in the spiny stellates. [Note that complex synaptic potentials can sometimes also occur in cortical
neurons during in vivo sleep spindles: cf. Fig. 1A of Contreras and Steraide (1996).] The spindle is followed by gamma oscillation in superficial layers (C, bottom
trace). Conditions: nRT cells biased by 0.17 to 0.18 nA, and TCR cells by Ϫ0.08 to Ϫ0.07 nA; axonal gap junction conductance ϭ 3 nS for superficial pyramids
and 0 nS for all other cortical principal cells; relative to “baseline conductances” (APPENDIX B), intrinsic nRT ␥-aminobutyric acid (GABA) conductances ϫ 0.2;
TCR GABA conductances ϫ 3; TCR 3 nRT AMPA ϫ 3; layer 6 pyramids 3 nRT N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) ϫ 0.02; layer 6 pyramids 3 TCR NMDA ϫ
0.2 and AMPA ϫ 0.1.

2200

TRAUB ET AL.

FIG. 5. Depolarization of nRT cells in the isolated model reticular nucleus
leads to a 6-Hz synchronized oscillation that requires gap junctions (dendritic
in this model, with conductance 1 nS and an average of 2.5 gap junctions on
each cell), but that does not require recurrent inhibition. A: simulation of Fig.
4 was repeated, but with bias currents to the nRT cells increased by 0.1 nA.
There is a 6-Hz population oscillation. B: same as A, but between-nRT gap
junctions were blocked. C: same as A (with gap junctions intact), but betweennRT synaptic inhibition blocked.

J Neurophysiol • VOL

chronization of sleep spindle oscillations (Fuentealba et al.
2004).
Neocortical epileptogenesis in the presence of electrical
coupling between subpopulations of principal neurons
In the monograph of Traub and Miles (1991), some of the
basic principles of epileptogenesis in the disinhibited hippocampal CA3 region in vitro were analyzed. CA3 pyramidal
cells are intrinsically bursting neurons, and are synaptically
connected in such a way that an intrinsic burst in a single
presynaptic neuron can evoke, with latency of tens of milliseconds, a burst in a monosynaptically connected postsynaptic
neuron (Miles and Wong 1986, 1987). In addition, there is
enough recurrent excitatory connectivity, even in vitro, so that
on average bursting in one presynaptic neuron will actually
evoke bursting in more than one postsynaptic neuron. Thus by
a chain reaction, bursting in a single neuron can lead to
bursting throughout the whole population, with latency from
initial burst to peak number of cells firing dependent on the
latency for bursting to spread from cell to cell, and on the
density of connections. Although some of the excitatory synaptic connections between neocortical layer 5 tufted pyramids
are extremely powerful (see APPENDIX B), we are not aware of
data documenting the transmission of a burst from one neuron
directly to another in neocortex, either for the case of layer 5
pyramids or for other pairs of neocortical neurons (either of
homogeneous cell type or not). Thus it is not clear whether the
above analysis of hippocampal bursts applies to cortex. It is
certainly the case that during a synchronized burst in neocortex, each principal neuron “experiences” a very large EPSP
(Gutnick et al. 1982), consistent with the synchronized discharge of many neurons, although this information is not
sufficient to define how the synchrony comes about.
In Traub and Miles (1991), we also considered the case in
which a homogeneous population of neurons were all regular
spiking, and synaptic connections were not strong enough to
transfer firing from a single neuron to another neuron (Fig. 6.11
of that monograph); we asked what sort of stimulus was
necessary to synchronize the population. Clearly, firing in a
single neuron will no longer suffice. It turns out that a threshold
number of cells needs to be discharged together; the value of
the threshold number depends on parameters, of course, but in
general it can be much smaller than the total number of cells,
even if much larger than one. What we did not consider at that
time, however, was the possibility of electrical coupling between axons (Schmitz et al. 2001), which constitutes another
pathway (besides excitatory chemical synapses) whereby action potentials might cross from neuron to neuron.
Because electrical coupling may well occur in neocortex
between principal neurons (see APPENDIX B), and because of the
heterogeneity of cell types in neocortex, it appears unlikely that
an idea as simple as the “chain reaction” (described above) will
suffice to capture exactly how synchronization takes place.
Therefore what we shall attempt to do in the following is
illustrate some examples of what can occur in the model, and
make certain correlations with experimental observations. A
more theoretical analysis must be deferred.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

constituted appears rather to be consistent with the notion of
Ulrich and Huguenard (1997) that within-nRT synaptic inhibition subserves some purpose other than spindling, perhaps
what they refer to as “lateral inhibition.”
On the other hand, if we repeat the simulation of Fig. 4,
isolating the nucleus reticularis, but now (Fig. 5) further
depolarize nRT neurons (bias currents in Fig. 4 ϭ 0.17 to 0.18
nA, in Fig. 5 bias currents ϭ 0.27 to 0.28 nA), then a
synchronized reticularis oscillation does occur (Fig. 5), at
approximately 6 Hz. This simulated isolated nRT oscillation
requires gap junctions to remain synchronized (Fig. 5B), but
not within-nRT synaptic inhibition (Fig. 5C). Still further
depolarization of the nRT neurons in the model resulted in
rapid tonic firing; on the other hand, metabotropic effects such
as reducing one or more Kϩ conductances might have allowed
a 10-Hz oscillation, a matter not further explored here. Landisman et al. (2002) observed oscillations in the reticular nucleus in vitro, that required gap junctional communication, but
not synaptic transmission; their oscillations could occur at
frequencies around 10 Hz. An in vivo study has also found
evidence for electrical coupling between nRT neurons, in the
form of halothane-sensitive spikelets, and simulations in that
study showed that such coupling could contribute to the syn-

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

2201

SYNCHRONIZED

AND

PARTIALLY

SYNCHRONIZED

INTERICTAL

BURSTS IN MODEL NEOCORTEX (THALAMUS DISCONNECTED), WITH
INCOMPLETE DISINHIBITION, WEAK RECURRENT EXCITATION BETWEEN
LAYER 4 SPINY STELLATES, AND ELECTRICAL COUPLING. Figure 6
illustrates varieties of “interictal” behavior when IPSCs are
reduced (to 1/10 their baseline values), recurrent excitation
between layer 4 spiny stellates is small (EPSCs at 0.25 ϫ
baseline; see APPENDIX B), and axonal gap junctions are “open”
between superficial pyramids, between spiny stellates, and
between layer 6 RS pyramids. (By “open” we mean that the
gap junction has a high enough conductance that a spike can
cross from axon to axon.) Figure 6A illustrates a “classicalappearing” interictal burst, which produces fields in superficial
and deep layers and bursts in all cortical principal cell types.
The bottom traces are the total AMPA conductance (green) and
GABAA conductance (orange) developing in the layer 6 pyramid. Note the large “PDS” (paroxysmal depolarization shift)
AMPA conductance, Ͼ100 nS (Matsumoto and Ajmone Marsan 1964; Prince 1968; Sawa et al. 1963). The inhibitory
conductance during the PDS is small, even though inhibition is
not completely blocked, and interneurons are firing robustly
(not shown). Of additional note is the very fast oscillation

J Neurophysiol • VOL

(VFO) superimposed on the fields, especially at 1 mm (topmost
trace), a topic to be considered further later on. Finally, there
is a low-amplitude oscillation in the field at 1 mm (about 20
Hz), which results from the activity of the electrically and
synaptically coupled superficial FRB pyramidal neurons.
In addition to the obvious synchronized burst in Fig. 6A,
partially synchronized bursts can also occur; one of these is
shown in Fig. 6B. The partially synchronized burst is most
obvious (in terms of the fields and firing of individual neurons)
in the more superficial layers, although a clear EPSC is seen in
the illustrated layer 6 pyramid (bottom trace). Three layer 5
pyramids did not fire in the simulation of Fig. 6B, and the mean
synaptically induced depolarization was 10 mV. The occurrence of partially synchronized bursts in the model is reminiscent of localized small-amplitude bursts during epileptogenesis
in the cat in vivo (Steriade and Contreras 1998).
WITH STRONG RECURRENT EXCITATION BETWEEN LAYER 4 SPINY
STELLATES, AND WITH EXTENSIVE ELECTRICAL COUPLING BETWEEN
CORTICAL PRINCIPAL NEURONS, DISINHIBITION LEADS TO
“POLYSPIKES.” Figure 7 illustrates a series of simulations of

the cortical portion of the model (thalamus disconnected),
wherein recurrent synaptic connections between layer 4 spiny

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. 6. Examples of synchronized epileptiform bursts that involve all cortical layers for
about 50 ms (A), or that are attenuated and predominantly in superficial layers (B), from the
same simulation. Note the superimposed very fast
oscillation in the fields in A (about 300 Hz). Layer
2/3 pyramidal FRB and layer 5 tufted IB cell
traces are in red. Bottom traces: total AMPA
input (green) and GABAA input (orange) to the
layer 6 nontufted pyramid just above. Thalamus
disconnected and IPSC conductances ϫ 0.1. Axonal gap junctions “open” between axons of superficial pyramids, spiny stellates and deep nontufted pyramids. Recurrent synaptic connections
between spiny stellates have a “low” value
(0.25 ϫ baseline). Depolarizing bias currents of
0.1 nA to deep pyramids (tufted and nontufted).

2202

TRAUB ET AL.

stellates are “strong” (AMPA conductances at 2 ϫ baseline
value, peak conductance 1.47 nS); in addition, axonal gap
junction conductances were “high” within the following neuronal populations: superficial pyramids; spiny stellates; layer 5
pyramids; layer 6 pyramids. Each panel shows the effects of
scaling cortical IPSCs by some value (ϫ 0.05 in Fig. 7A, ϫ 0.1
in Fig. 7B, etc.).
In Fig. 7A, with GABAA conductances almost fully blocked
(and recall that the model does not contain GABAB conductances), a “fast run” (Steriade et al. 1998a) occurs, at about 10
Hz, consisting of 17 burst complexes that terminate spontaneously; the last 5 of the bursts are shown in the panel. Of note
is the continuous VFO in the fields (*), and the near continuous
firing of the spiny stellate cell (black trace in bottommost
portion of the panel); examination of the average behavior of
spiny stellates (not shown) indicates that this near-continuous
firing is typical. Even with such near-complete disinhibition,
with the model parameters used, axonal coupling is necessary
for epileptogenesis: when none of the cortical principal cells
has such coupling, there is no synchronized bursting, after an
J Neurophysiol • VOL

initial transient (not shown). When layer 4 spiny stellates are
the only principal cell population to be electrically coupled
(parameters as in APPENDIX B), then a 4-burst polyspike occurs,
complete with VFO (not shown). If layer 5 tufted IB pyramids
were the only principal cells to be electrically coupled, a single
synchronized burst occurred, with VFO much attentuated compared with Fig. 7A. When superficial pyramids were the only
principal cells to be electrically coupled, then a 15-Hz oscillation occurred in superficial layers only, that appeared to be
driven by the superficial FRB pyramidal cells (not shown). If,
in this latter situation, IPSCs were suppressed completely, then
a single synchronized burst did occur, but with attenuated VFO
(not shown).
Thus recurrent synaptic connections and electrical coupling
between layer 4 spiny stellates seem to be, in this model,
critical factors in producing runs of synchronized bursts, and in
generating VFO between, and superimposed on, the burst
complexes.
When parameters are as in Fig. 7A, but IPSCs are somewhat
larger (Fig. 7B), then double bursts occur, with a separation of

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. 7. Effects of disinhibition in model (cortex
only, with thalamus disconnected), when there are
open gap junctions between the axons of the respective principal cell populations (superficial pyramids,
spiny stellates, layer 5 pyramids, layer 6 pyramids),
and spiny stellates are strongly interconnected by
AMPA receptors (conductance twice “baseline”; see
APPENDIX B). In each panel, the traces are, respectively, field at 1 mm; field at 2 mm; superficial RS
pyramid (black) and superficial FRB pyramid (red);
spiny stellate (black) and layer 5 tufted IB cell (red).
A: all IPSC values at 0.05 ϫ baseline values (APPENDIX B). Runs of about 11-Hz epileptiform bursts
occur, with superimposed very fast oscillation (VFO)
(*). Note the almost continuous firing of the spiny
stellate cell. B: all IPSC values at 0.1 ϫ baseline.
Figure shows a double burst with superimposed VFO
(*). The spiny stellate cell fires almost continuously
during the double burst, but pyramidal cells each fire
2 intense bursts (the superficial pyramids also fire
some action potentials between the intense bursts).
There is low-amplitude beta activity in the superficial
layers (arrow) at about 17 Hz, driven by the superficial FRB pyramids. C: all IPSC values 0.25 ϫ baseline. Superficial FRB pyramids are active, but there is
little synchronized activity. D: all IPSC values
0.75 ϫ baseline. There is a gamma oscillation (ϳ30
Hz) in superficial layers, similar to Fig. 2.

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

about 100 ms between bursts. Again there is VFO (*) between
and on top of the bursts. The spiny stellate cell fires throughout
the double burst (as do other spiny stellates; not shown),
whereas layer 5 IB cells fire 2 separate bursts (red trace in
bottommost part of the panel, Fig. 7B). Layer 5 tufted RS
pyramids and layer 6 nontufted pyramids also fire in discrete
bursts, in a pattern similar to that of layer 5 IB cells, both
during the fast run of Fig. 7A and during the double burst in
Fig. 7B (not shown).
A further increase in IPSC size (Fig. 7C) abolishes
epileptiform activity, as well as population oscillations
visible at the field level. A still further increase in IPSC size
(Fig. 7D) returns the system to state in which there are
gamma oscillations (ϳ30 Hz) in superficial layers alone, a
state similar to that illustrated in Fig. 2. Spiny stellates are
mostly silent during the conditions of Fig. 7, C and D, as are
deep pyramidal cells.

2203

Epileptiform double bursts occur in rat auditory cortex in
vitro, in kainate plus blockade of GABAA and
GABAB receptors
Figure 8 shows (on the left) data from the simulation of Fig.
7B, in which GABAA conductances have been reduced by 90%
and GABAB conductances are absent. The simulation illustrates a double burst in the field (bottom trace),with all cell
types also exhibiting double bursts, with the exception of the
spiny stellate, that fires almost continuously throughout the
double burst. The right side of Fig. 8 illustrates experimental
recordings (not simultaneous) from double bursts recorded in
rat auditory cortex in vitro, in the presence of kainate (400 nM)
and blockers of GABAA and GABAB receptors (picrotoxin, 40
␮M, and CGP55845A,10 ␮M, respectively). The experimental
interburst interval is somewhat longer than the simulated interburst interval. Again, in the experiment, all of the recorded
cell types exhibited double bursts as well, approximately in

J Neurophysiol • VOL

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. 8. Simulated double burst compared with a double
burst recorded in vitro, in kainate together with block of
GABAA and GABAB receptors. Model data are from the simulation used in Fig. 7B. Experimental data are from rat auditory
cortex in vitro, bathed in kainate, picrotoxin, and CGP55845A.
“NBC”: nest basket cell (Wang et al. 2002). Experimental
intracellular recordings were not obtained simultaneously: in
the figure, they were aligned to the beginning of each concurrently recorded field potential burst.

2204

TRAUB ET AL.

phase with the major field deflections, with the exception of
layer 4 neurons identified as spiny stellates. These cells fired
throughout the double bursts (n ϭ 5); one of the spiny stellates
is shown in Fig. 8. However, this cell does show some degree
of spike adaptation toward the end of its firing. Particularly
striking in this Fig. 8 are the similar appearances of the fields
in model and experiment, with prominent VFO in both.
The simulated layer 2/3 cells exhibit bursts that are less
depolarized than the corresponding experimental bursts, perhaps a consequence (in part) of the incomplete disinhibition in
the simulation. In addition, the simulated layer 2/3 cells generate a few action potentials between the larger bursts, unlike
the experiment; this could be a result of the more intense firing
of the model layer 4 stellate neurons than in the experiment,
combined with the strong synaptic activation of superficial
neurons by layer 4 neurons.
VOLTAGE-INDEPENDENT NMDA RECEPTORS AT BETWEEN-SPINY
STELLATE CONNECTIONS, COMBINED WITH ELECTRICAL COUPLING,
CAN ALSO LEAD TO EPILEPTIFORM BURSTS WITH PROLONGED SPINY
STELLATE FIRING, AS WELL AS VFO. Fleidervish et al. (1998)

FIG. 9. An epileptiform burst with prolonged firing in spiny stellate cells, when
layer 4 spiny stellate 3 spiny stellate connections use NMDA receptors that are voltage
and [Mg2ϩ]o independent (cf. Fleidervish et
al. 1998), although these authors claimed only
relative voltage and magnesium independence
of NMDA receptors at connections between
spiny stellate cells in layer 4 of mouse barrel
cortex). In the simulation shown here (left
column), NMDA conductance between spiny
stellates was 1.25 ϫ baseline, and the decay
time constant was 15 ms. AMPA conductances at these connections were 0.25 ϫ baseline value. Cortical IPSCs were blocked and
the thalamus disconnected. Bias currents were
small (Ͻ0.1 nA). Axonal gap junctions were
open between superficial pyramids, between
spiny stellates, and between layer 6 pyramids,
but not between layer 5 pyramids. Right: an
experimental single burst shown for comparison. Experimental conditions were as in Fig.
7, but without CGP55845A in the bath (i.e.,
without block of GABAB receptors). A filtered version (80 –200 Hz) of the field trace is
shown to emphasize the occurrence of VFO in
the field, as is obvious in the raw data for the
simulated field.

J Neurophysiol • VOL

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

described, in mouse somatosensory cortex in vitro (using
tangentially cut slices to isolate barrels in layer 4), a system of
recurrent excitatory connections between spiny stellates that

was in large part mediated by NMDA receptors. This recurrent
system was powerful, in that epileptiform activity could occur
in disinhibited preparations even during blockade of AMPA/
kainate receptors. Furthermore, perhaps because the NMDA
receptors contained the NR2C subunit, NMDA-mediated currents were at least partially independent of membrane potential
and of [Mg2ϩ]o: NMDA EPSPs could be detected at or near
resting potential without lowering [Mg2ϩ]o. The observed
NMDA conductances were brief, having time constants Ͻ20
ms.
We thus ran some simulations in which AMPA receptor
conductances at between-spiny stellate connections were “low”
(peak conductance 0.18 nS), whereas NMDA conductances
were made completely voltage-independent (for the usual
scheme of voltage-dependence of NMDA conductances, see
APPENDIX B). Figure 9 illustrates an example simulation with
spiny stellate NMDA conductance at 1.25 ϫ baseline value,
␶NMDA ϭ 15 ms, and with complete disinhibition. The thalamic
portion of the network was disconnected, and electrical coupling was present between the axons of superficial pyramids, of
spiny stellates, and of layer 6 pyramids. Although a double
burst does not occur, the synchronized burst is prolonged and
has prominent VFO. Additionally, the firing of spiny stellate

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

2205

THE CORTICAL NETWORK CAN GENERATE A SPIKE-WAVE-LIKE PATTERN IF—IN ADDITION TO PARTIAL DISINHIBITION AND ELECTRICAL
COUPLING—LAYER 5 AND 6 PYRAMIDAL CELLS ARE DEPOLAR-

Synchronized epileptiform bursts shown in simulations in the previous figures were sporadic (at least so far as
could be determined in simulations that usually lasted 1.6 s,
and at most 2.5 s), even with GABAA receptors largely
blocked. In particular, we did not see synchronized bursts at
frequencies Ͼ1 Hz when deep pyramidal cells were depolarized with small currents of Ͻ0.1 nA, even in disinhibited
conditions. [The assumption that Ͼ2–3 Hz spike-wave patterns in vivo require some degree of cortical disinhibition
seems reasonable for several reasons: 1) there is an in vivo
genetic rat model of spike-wave epilepsy in which intracortical inhibition is impaired (Luhmann et al. 1995). In addition, diffuse cortical application of a penicillin solution to
cat cortex can elicit a spike-wave-like epileptic pattern
(Avoli and Gloor 1982; Gloor et al. 1977). 2) A spike-wavelike pattern (but at very low frequencies, about 0.1 Hz) has
been observed in vitro during blockade of GABAA and
GABAB receptors (Castro-Alamancos and Rigas 2002). The
question is whether cortical disinhibition is sufficient for a
spike-wave-like pattern.] We thus wondered whether simply
depolarizing pyramidal cells, in addition to having electrical
coupling and partial disinhibition present, could generate a
spike-wave-like pattern at about 3 Hz.
Figure 10 demonstrates that, at least in our model (in this
case with the thalamic portion disconnected), simply depolarizing deep (layers 5 and 6) pyramids is sufficient to speed up,
and make more regular, the occurrence of synchronized bursts,
so that a 3-Hz network oscillation can occur: the depolarizing
currents serve to overcome the tendency of pyramidal cell
AHPs to slow the burst frequency [deep pyramidal cells have
an afterhyperpolarization (AHP) decay time constant of 1 s; see
IZED.

J Neurophysiol • VOL

FIG. 10. Simulated spike-wavelike pattern (ϳ3.2 Hz) in cortical portion of
the model, with thalamus disconnected. Cortical IPSC values were 0.2 ϫ
baseline values, and layer 5 and layer 6 pyramids were depolarized with 0.35
to 0.45 nA depolarizing currents. Axonal gap junctions were open between
superficial pyramids, between spiny stellates, and between layer 6 pyramids,
but not between layer 5 pyramids. AMPA conductances at connections
between spiny stellates were 0.25 ϫ baseline. Burst marked with the * in A is
expanded in B. Traces in B are ( from the top): field at 2 mm (note superimposed VFO); layer 2/3 pyramids (black ϭ RS, red ϭ FRB); a layer 4 spiny
stellate cell; layer 5 tufted pyramids (black ϭ RS, red ϭ IB); a layer 6
nontufted pyramid; total GABAA (orange) and AMPA (green) conductances in
the illustrated layer 6 cell.

]. In this figure, layer 5 and 6 pyramids were
depolarized with 0.35– 0.45 nA currents; whereas IPSC conductances were 0.2 ϫ their baseline values; axonal gap junctions were open between superficial pyramids, between layer 4
spiny stellates, and between layer 6 pyramids; and AMPA
receptors at connections between layer 4 spiny stellates had a
“low” value (0.25 ϫ baseline). The cellular firing patterns are
similar to those previously illustrated, although spiny stellate
bursting is brief (attributable to the limited recurrent excitation
in layer 4), and layer 6 pyramidal cell bursting is more
prolonged (attributable to the induced depolarization in this
cell population). The only current in the neurons with time
course appropriate for gating an oscillation at about 3 Hz is the
slow calcium-mediated AHP current (compare Timofeev et al.
2004).
APPENDIX A

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

neurons is prolonged compared with the firing of other principal cell types. An experimental epileptiform burst [rat auditory
cortex bathed in kainate (400 nM) and picrotoxin (40 ␮M), but
without block of GABAB receptors] is shown for comparison,
in Fig. 9, to emphasize the similarity in cellular firing patterns,
and in the occurrence of VFO in the field. [The precise
experimental nature of the glutamate receptors at within-layer
4 spiny stellate connections in rat auditory cortex is (to our
knowledge) not known, however.]
Thus sustained firing of layer 4 spiny stellate neurons, and
layer 4 VFO, can occur in the model under at least 2 conditions: 1) high-conductance AMPA receptors at connections
between layer 4 spiny stellates (Figs. 7B and 8), or 2) lower
conductance AMPA receptors, together with rapid-timecourse, relatively voltage-independent NMDA receptors, at
connections between spiny stellate cells (Fig. 9). In both cases,
there is strong phasic synaptic excitation between the spiny
stellate neurons. As will be shown later, it is possible to
“titrate” the number of bursts in a row by altering the amplitude
of EPSCs at recurrent layer 4 spiny stellate synapse; in the
model, these connections provide the essence of the transition
between spike-wave and polyspike-wave.
Next, we shall consider 2 types of epileptogenesis in vivo:
approximately 3-Hz spike-wave, and approximately 10-Hz fast
runs.

2206

TRAUB ET AL.

We emphasize once more the occurrence of VFO on the field
potential signal in Fig. 10, a very specific prediction of our
model. It is notable that VFO has indeed been observed
superimposed on the “spike” component of spontaneous spikewave seizures in ketamine–xylazine-anesthetized cats, seizures
that originate in the depolarizing component of the slow
rhythm of sleep [see, for example, Fig. 1 of Grenier et al.
(2003), and also data below].
Figure 11A shows the
power spectrum of somewhat over 1.6 s of simulated field data
(at 2 mm), encompassing 6 “spikes” (same simulation as in
Fig. 10). Of note is the peak near 100 Hz, quite similar to the
in vivo cat data of Grenier et al. (2003; their Fig. 1). The
spectrum in the model case, however, is more complex than the
in vivo data, in that there are several additional regions of
energy (e.g., around 200 Hz, and 300 – 400 Hz); the latter
might correspond to what has been called “fast ripples” in
some of the human epilepsy literature (Bragin et al. 1999;
Staba et al. 2004).
We suggest that the complex spectrum of the field arises as
follows. Principal cell electrical coupling in the model exists
only between cells of defined populations, e.g., between superficial pyramids (RS and FRB together as one population),
between spiny stellates, between layer 6 nontufted pyramids,
and sometimes between layer 5 tufted pyramids (RS and IB
together)— but not between pairs of cells, each of which lies in
a different population. As a result, there is a clear correlation
between spike firing times within populations, as seen in the
average signals in Fig. 11B. The spiny stellates are especially
correlated with each other (but note that, as described in
APPENDIX B, spiny stellate transmembrane currents are not used
in the estimation of extracellular fields because of the shape of
the dendritic domain of these cells). There is some apparent
correlation between average signals in a given cell population
(see vertical lines in Fig. 11B), but in fact the field is influenced
by transmembrane currents of all the cell populations, and
interactions between the different cell populations arise by
chemical synapses; that is, interactions that act slowly, relative
to interactions mediated by gap junctions. Thus it is not
surprising that the field spectrum is so complex and that it has
peaks at very high frequencies. A significant point is that most
of the field signal cannot be attributed directly to the activity of
a particular subpopulation. A partial exception in our case is
the tail of VFO in the field, which corresponds to the prolonged
(and highly synchronized) firing of layer 6 nontufted pyramids
(not shown).
ORIGINS OF VFO IN THE SIMULATED FIELD.

spontaneous seizures in anesthetized rats (see METHODS), revealed a striking similarity with patterns previously reported in
cats (Dichter and Spencer 1969; Matsumoto and Ajmone
Marsan 1964; Prince 1968; Steriade and Contreras 1995; Steriade et al. 1998), and with the simulations and in vitro data
presented above (but see following text), although the in vitro
and simulated cells did not usually become depolarized enough
to cause spike inactivation, and simulated neurons did not
exhibit the long postburst depolarizing tails seen in vivo.
Seizure activity was first detected as single large amplitude
spikes (clearly paroxysmal) associated with sleep spindles.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

IN VIVO RECORDINGS DURING EPILEPTOGENESIS: INTERICTAL
BURSTS, SPIKE-WAVE, AND THE ASSOCIATION OF SPIKELETS WITH
BURSTS. Intracellular recordings in vivo (n ϭ 8), during

FIG. 11. There is high coherence among the cells in each electrically
coupled subpopulation (data from same simulation as in Fig. 10). A: power
spectrum of the 2-mm field, data encompassing 6 “spike” complexes. Note the
peak near 100 Hz; compare Fig. 1 of Grenier et al. (2003). B: this part shows
the average somatic voltages (inverted) for layer 2/3 FRB pyramids and layer
4 spiny stellates, along with sample cells of each type. Coherence within
subpopulations does not, however, fully explain by itself the VFO in the field
(middle trace) because the different subpopulations are not electrically coupled
with each other. Note also that spiny stellate membrane currents are not used
in the calculation of the extracellular field (APPENDIX B). The tail of VFO in the
field corresponds to the sustained synchronized firing of layer 6 nontufted
pyramids (cf. Fig. 10).

Spikes grew in amplitude and frequency and were followed by
full-blown seizures characterized by a mixture of fast runs of
spikes at 10 –15 Hz, and spike-wave (SW) or polyspike-wave
(PSW) activity at 1– 4 Hz. Once established, seizures tended to
recur every 1 to 3 min. Intracellularly, EEG spikes corresponded with large postsynaptic potentials similar to paroxysmal depolarizing shifts (PDS). Figure 12A shows an example
of a PDS recorded from a fast spiking (FS) and a regular

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

2207

spiking (RS) neuron. The depolarization was larger than 20
mV in the RS cell and caused significant spike inactivation
followed by a long depolarizing tail with similar time course as
the negative (downward) wave in the EEG. (In vitro and
simulated cells did not usually become depolarized enough to
cause spike inactivation, and simulated neurons did not exhibit
the long postburst depolarizing tails seen in vivo. The latter
may reflect the omission in the model of metabotropic glutamate receptors and nonspecific cation currents.) Repetitive
spikes at 1– 4 Hz resembling SW seizures were associated with
bursts of action potentials in all neurons recorded (Fig. 12B). In
5 cells the depolarization occurring during EEG spikes was
preceded and crowned by bursts of short spikelets of 2–7 mV
(Fig. 12C, in vivo) resembling the spikelets resulting from
antidromic spikes in the model (Fig. 12C, model: same cell as
the layer 5 tufted IB cell in Fig. 7B). Note that some of the
action potentials in cells exhibiting spikelets (Fig. 12C) were
inflected on the rising phase, suggesting an antidromic origin,
as would be expected if some of the bursting activity involves
an electrically coupled network of pyramidal cell axons (Cunningham et al. 2004a).
J Neurophysiol • VOL

IN OUR MODEL OF SPIKE-WAVE, WITH THE THALAMUS CONNECTED,
TCR FIRING IS LARGELY SUPPRESSED, AS REPORTED PREVIOUSLY IN
VIVO AND IN A MODEL (LYTTON ET AL. 1997), CONSISTENT WITH A
CORTICAL GENERATION OF SPIKE-WAVE WITHOUT ALTERATIONS IN

Steriade and
Contreras (1995) reported that, during spike-wave seizures
occurring spontaneously in ketamine–xylazine-anesthetized
cats, and arising out of the slow (Ͻ1 Hz) rhythm, firing of TCR
neurons is largely suppressed. In the Strasbourg rat model of
spontaneous spike-wave epilepsy, Pinault et al. (1998) used
both intracellular and extracellular recordings to show that
TCR cells usually fired either one action potential or a burst
concomitant with the EEG “spike” part of spike-wave.
Figure 13 shows the results when the simulation of Fig. 10
was repeated, but with the thalamic portion of the model now
connected. The firing of cortical neurons is similar to what was
seen before, although firing in layer 6 nontufted pyramids is
not as prolonged. In addition, consistent with what has been
reported in vivo, TCR neurons fire a single action potential per
“EEG spike.” [This was true for each of 3 TCR neurons (whose
output was stored) in this simulation, for each of the “EEG

SYNAPTIC CONDUCTANCES WITHIN THE THALAMUS.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. 12. Examples of seizure activity in cortex in
vivo. A: FS cell and RS cell recorded intracellularly from
rat neocortex in vivo each show a paroxysmal depolarization shift (PDS) during an interictal spike in the simultaneously recorded electroencephalogram (EEG) from the
vicinity of the cell. B: stable epoch of large EEG spikes at
3– 4 Hz resembling spike-wave, with simultaneous intracellular recording from the vicinity of the electrode,
shows a PDS concomitant with each EEG spike. C:
spikelets (indicated by dots) of 2–7 mV occurred in bursts
associated with EEG spikes and often preceded bursts of
action potentials (in vivo). Similar spikelets were observed in the model (model), where they represented
antidromic spikes.

2208

TRAUB ET AL.

(0.25 ϫ baseline). Figure 14 shows the result of repeating the
simulation of Fig. 13, but with this AMPA conductance instead at
a “high” value (2 ϫ baseline). Consistent with the results of earlier
figures (e.g., Fig. 7), each “spike” now becomes a brief series of
“spikes” at about 13 Hz: a polyspike. The frequency of polyspikes
is about 1.6 to 2.5 Hz. Note that, as before, the spiny stellate cell
fires almost continuously during a polyspike (Fig. 14B), whereas
pyramids and nRT cells fire a burst of action potentials with each
“spike” in the polyspike. Likewise, TCR neurons fire only a single
action potential with each “spike” in the polyspike.
IN A SITUATION WHERE THE THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL GENERATES
POLYSPIKE-WAVE, DISCONNECTION OF THE THALAMUS CAUSES THE
MODEL TO GENERATE POLYSPIKE-WAVE AND A FAST RUN (ABOUT 12
HZ). The simulation of Fig. 14 was repeated, but with the

thalamic portion of the model disconnected. The resulting

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. 13. During simulated spike-wave with the thalamus connected (same
simulation as Fig. 10, except now the thalamic part of the model is included,
with intrathalamic IPSCs at baseline values, whereas cortical IPSCs remain at
0.2 ϫ baseline values), nRT neurons fire bursts and TCR neurons fire single
spikes. Burst in A marked * is expanded in B, with the top trace the field at 2
mm. Note the bursting in the layer 6 cell, a representative of the population of
pyramids that connects to nRT cells and TCR cells. nRT bursting and recurrent
inhibition of TCR cells “wins” over the direct excitation of TCR cells, so that
firing in TCR neurons is mostly suppressed. Compare Lytton et al. (1997).
When this simulation was repeated with axonal gap junctions between cortical
principal cells closed, then spike-wave did not occur (not shown).

spikes.”] In contrast, nRT cells fire a burst of action potentials
with each “EEG spike” [true for each of 3 nRT cells(whose
output was stored) in each “EEG spike”], again in a pattern
similar to that described by Steriade and Contreras (1995),
Lytton et al. (1997), and Slaght et al. (2002).
Both Pinault et al. (1998) and Crunelli and Leresche (2002)
reported prolonged hyperpolarizations in thalamic neurons during
in vivo experimental spike-wave seizures. We did not observe
such hyperpolarizations in our model, probably because the model
did not include GABAB conductances.
IN THE MODEL, INCREASING RECURRENT SYNAPTIC EXCITATION BETWEEN LAYER 4 SPINY STELLATES CONVERTS A SPIKE-WAVE PATTERN INTO A POLYSPIKE-WAVE PATTERN. In the simulations of

Figs. 10 –13, the size of AMPA receptor conductances at spiny
stellate 3 spiny stellate synaptic connections was at a “low” value
J Neurophysiol • VOL

FIG. 14. Increasing recurrent chemical synaptic excitation between layer 4
spiny stellate neurons, in the model, converts spike-wave to polyspike-and-wave.
Same simulation as Fig. 13, but here AMPA conductances at spiny stellate 3
spiny stellate synapses are 2 ϫ baseline, rather than 0.25 ϫ baseline. Triple burst
at * in A is expanded in B, with the topmost trace in B the field at 2 mm. Note that
the layer 4 spiny stellate cell fires throughout the triple burst, whereas layer 5/6
pyramids, and nRT cells, discharge in 3 distinct bursts. TCR neuron fires a single
action potential with each “EEG spike.” Note also the VFO throughout the triple
burst (and also the other polyspikes).

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

that go on for several minutes, far longer than what is usually
seen (Steriade and Contreras 1998).
DISCUSSION

It is likely, in our opinion, that detailed modeling of extensive thalamocortical circuits will be one of many prerequisites
for the understanding of any aspect of normal global brain
function. Toward such an end, our present results represent an
extremely preliminary first step—preliminary not only because
of the relatively small number of cells (about 3,500) and
limited number of cell types, but preliminary as well because
(again, in our opinion) one cannot proceed directly from an
initial network model to subtle aspects of brain function, such
as learning or information processing. Rather, one must first
calibrate the model against experimental preparations that
exhibit relatively simplified network behaviors. Here, “relatively simplified” means “in comparison with physiological,
normal, in vivo network behaviors.” Network behaviors are
simplified, relative to the normal case, when there is a high
degree of correlation between the activities of different neurons, so that the network behavior can be defined by observations of a small number of cells, and of the extracellular field.
We consider pharmacologically induced network oscillations,
sleep spindles, and seizures, to be examples of such relatively
simplified behaviors, and these are the examples we have
chosen to study here. An inescapable conclusion of this preliminary work, we feel, is that global brain function can never
be fully understood simply in terms of neuronal intrinsic
properties and chemical synapses alone: electrical coupling
between neurons is key as well, just as is the case with
invertebrate central pattern generating circuits (Marder 1984).
The model further indicates that the recurrent interactions
between layer 4 spiny stellates may play a critical role in the
patterning of seizure phenomenology.
TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS: INCREASING PROGRAM COMPLEXITY
AS MORE CELL TYPES ARE ADDED. Before discussing scientific

FIG. 15. Polyspike-and-wave simulation of Fig. 14 was repeated, but with
the thalamus disconnected. Now, after a series of polyspikes, collective activity
turns into a “fast run” (Steriade et al. 1998) at ϳ12 Hz. Only a portion of the
ϳ1.6 s fast run is shown, for the sake of clarity. Note the almost continuous
firing of the layer 4 spiny stellate neuron during the fast run, contrasted with
the repeating bursts in other principal cortical neurons. We interpret this
behavior to mean that the limited firing of TCR neurons during polyspikes may
have more significant effects on the cortex by feedforward inhibition, than by
direct excitation, under conditions of partial cortical disinhibition. This might
also explain why undercutting cortex in vivo can lead to cortical hyperexcitability (Topolnik et al. 2003), and why feline cortex overlying a thalamectomy
can exhibit sustained (minutes) fast runs (Steriade and Contreras 1998).

J Neurophysiol • VOL

predictions of the model, we must first put the structural features
of the model into context. The most important feature to understand is this: What exactly makes the model complicated? It is
clear that, as more cell types are included, then more single-cell
models must be built, and their behavior compared with the
physiology of pharmacologically isolated, anatomically characterized single neurons. This model complexity added in this way
grows linearly with the number of cell types: another cell, another
model (unless one can assume that intrinsic properties of a new
cell type are equivalent to the intrinsic properties of an existing
cell type). Much more troubling for the modeler is that the
complexity of code, arising from cellular interactions, grows as
the square of the number of cell types. Thus for each ordered pair
(cell type 1, cell type 2), one must decide on connectivity, where
the connections go, and the properties of the connections. In
addition, some piece of code must be devoted to calculating the
synaptic conductances in the cells of type 2 caused by activity in
the cells of type 1, for every ordered pair of cell types. Any
interested reader who examines the integration program will
immediately see the consequences of this complexity, in terms of
sheer length of code. This type of problem will, of course, only get
worse—and rapidly so—as models start to include more types of
neurons.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

signals began with spike-wave, but then transformed into a
phenomenon resembling an in vivo “fast run” (Steriade et al.
1998a; see especially their Fig. 9), a collective highly synchronized oscillation in which pyramidal neurons depolarize and
generate brief bursts together, at frequencies around 10 Hz.
Note, however, that—not unexpectedly—spiny stellate cells
(in the model) fire almost continuously throughout the fast run,
a clear model prediction. Only part of the fast run is illustrated
in Fig. 15; the fast run lasted for about 1.6 s.
The data in Fig. 15 indicate that the thalamus may, at least
on occasion, exert a restraining effect on cortical epileptogenesis, in the sense that a fast run represents more neuronal action
potentials per second than occurs just in polyspike-wave [compare also Topolnik et al. (2003) ]; such a restraining effect
could arise because of thalamic excitation of cortical interneurons, in a situation when spiny stellates are already firing near
maximally (during EEG “spikes”), and are therefore not further
excited by thalamic excitation themselves. Data of CastroAlamancos (2000) support the idea that, in vivo, a fast run at
10 Hz can occur without the thalamus. It is also interesting that,
in the generalized penicillin epilepsy model, in cats in vivo,
tonic– clonic seizures occur (instead of the usual spike-wave),
once thalamic electrical activity is suppressed by injection of
hypertonic KCl (Avoli and Gloor 1981). Furthermore, in cat
cortex in vivo, overlying a thalamectomy, fast runs can occur

2209

2210

TRAUB ET AL.

AXONAL COUPLING BETWEEN PRINCIPAL CORTICAL NEURONS
COULD EXPLAIN VERY FAST OSCILLATIONS DURING SEIZURES. The

evidence for electrical coupling between the axons of cortical
principal cells is only circumstantial, and is in part based on
experimental data from hippocampus; even in the hippocampus, ultrastructural evidence is so far lacking. Because electrical coupling plays such an essential role in our model (except
for spindles), we here briefly summarize the circumstantial
evidence, so that the reader can make an independent decision
on the rationale for including electrical axonal coupling in the
manner we have done.
1) Spikelets can be induced in hippocampal pyramidal cells
and dentate granule cells that are sensitive to gap junction blockers, follow Յ500 Hz stimuli without failure, propagate actively,
and propagate antidromically (i.e., appear first in the axon, then
the soma) (Schmitz et al. 2001; reviewed in Traub et al. 2002).
2) In 4 cases, CA1 pyramidal cells have been found to be
dye-coupled between their axons, by light microscopic criteria
(Schmitz et al. 2001).
3) Models based on sparse, strong axonal coupling can
account for hippocampal VFO in calcium-free media (Draguhn
et al. 1998; Traub et al. 1999), persistent gamma oscillations in
the hippocampus (Traub et al. 2000), and in vivo sharp-wave
ripples (Traub and Bibbig 2000).
4) Persistent gamma oscillations in superficial layers of rat
auditory cortex in vitro have a similar appearance to hippocampal persistent gamma (Hormuzdi et al. 2001; Fisahn et al.
1998), and can also be accounted for with a model using axonal
electrical coupling between superficial pyramidal cells (Cunningham et al. 2004a), provided FRB cells are included.
5) Spikelets are seen in cortical pyramidal cells (Cunningham et al. 2004a) and in entorhinal cortex neurons (Cunningham et al. 2004b).
6) A candidate set of gap junction forming proteins exists
for putative axonal gap junctions, pannexins 1 and 2 (Bruzzone
J Neurophysiol • VOL

et al. 2003), and pannexin2 mRNA is found in cortical layers
2– 6 (Cunningham et al. 2004a).
7) Dye coupling exists between cortical neurons, in deep
and superficial layers, and in layer 4, between neurons both
having their soma in the same layer (Gutnick and Prince 1981;
Gutnick et al. 1985). Such coupling occurs between pyramidal
cells and between stellate cells.
8) Surgically isolated stratum oriens, in the CA1 region in
vitro, a preparation with few if any pyramidal cell somata, can
generate VFO, as predicted by a model with axonal electrical
coupling; in addition, interneuron EPSCs exhibit a very highfrequency superimposed oscillation, as expected from a coupled axonal plexus (Cunningham et al. 2004b; Traub et al.
2003b; Whittington and Traub 2003).
Finally, we are not aware of any other model (i.e., one
without electrical coupling) that is able to account for the
experimentally observed properties of VFO and persistent
gamma oscillations, particularly the ability of isolated CA1
stratum oriens to generate approximately 100-Hz oscillations.
The effects, then, of including principal cell electrical coupling in the present model are these:
1) It allows persistent gamma oscillations to occur in superficial layers (Cunningham et al. 2004a).
2) It lowers the amount of recurrent synaptic excitation
required for epileptiform synchronization to occur in partially
disinhibited cortex. This happens because axonal coupling
provides additional pathways by which action potentials in one
excitatory axon might induce action potentials in another
excitatory axon.
3) It introduces tight correlations in the firing times of
cortical neurons, within specific subpopulations [e.g., among
the spiny stellates, or among superficial pyramids (Fig. 11)].
These tight correlations then show up as observable VFO
superimposed on EEG “spikes” and in the middle of
polyspikes, as well as producing an approximately 100-Hz
peak in the power spectrum of epileptiform events. This VFO
and spectral peak are seen in experimental epilepsies (Grenier
et al. 2003; Traub et al. 2001; this paper), and indeed a very
high frequency peak shows up in the power spectrum of
hippocampal persistent gamma as well (Traub et al. 2002).
We did not, however, observe in these simulations a clear
epoch of low-amplitude VFO before the epileptiform burst.
Such an epoch has been observed before epileptiform events in
hippocampal slices and in children with seizures caused by a
cortical dysplasia (Traub et al. 2001), and in anesthetized cats
with spontaneous seizures (Grenier et al. 2003). The reason for
the absence, in our model, of this early epoch of VFO is not
clear. Our guess is that the reason has to do with the fact that
we simulate only one column. Perhaps if we could model an
array of columns, with heterogeneous conditions of disinhibition or axonal coupling, then low-amplitude VFO might be
able to continue autonomously in one spot, and then induce
seizure activity in another spot.
RECURRENT EXCITATORY INTERACTIONS— EITHER CHEMICAL SYNAPTIC OR GAP-JUNCTION-MEDIATED OR BOTH— BETWEEN LAYER 4
SPINY STELLATE CELLS APPEAR IMPORTANT FOR EPILEPTOGENESIS:
ALLOWING EEG SPIKES TO OCCUR, AND ALLOWING EEG SPIKES TO
BECOME POLYSPIKES. The excitatory interactions between

layer 4 spiny stellate cells play a special role in epileptogenesis
in our model. First, electrical coupling between spiny stellate

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

In addition, as the number of connectivity parameters goes up
with the square of the number of cell types, it is easy to feel
overwhelmed by the number of seemingly arbitrary choices that
must be made. This is the main reason why, in our opinion,
emergent properties of only the simplest kind have to be analyzed
first, before the normal physiology can be studied properly.
Why then bother with such a detailed network model?
Because it is useful. At least, we shall argue below that
important experimental predictions can be made that would not
have been made without the model.
The model also serves—as if it were necessary!—to encourage
an extreme sense of humility in the face of the extraordinary
richness of behavior that even a small number of neurons can
generate.
We have used two well-studied collective oscillations, persistent gamma (Cunningham et al. 2004a) and thalamocortical
spindles (Bal et al. 1995a,b; Steriade 2001 2003), as a form of
calibration of the model (Figs. 2– 4). The calibration cannot
guarantee accuracy of all of the parameters, but does indicate,
in our opinion, that the model “lives” in a reasonable region of
its phase space.
The main predictions concern the existence of electrical
coupling between principal cortical neurons (pyramidal cells
and spiny stellate cells), and the contributions of spiny stellate
connectivity to epileptogenesis.

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Drs. Mircea Steriade, Hannah Monyer, Nancy Kopell, Vincenzo
Crunelli, and Stuart Hughes for helpful discussions and encouragement. This
work could not have been performed without the generous assistance of Dr.
Robert Walkup of the IBM T. J. Watson Research Center.
GRANTS

This work was supported by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, the National Institutes of Health Bioengineering Research
Partnership Grant R01NS-041811-01, the State University of New York
Downstate Graduate Research Initiative Program, the Medical Research Council (United Kingdom), the Wellcome Trust, and Volkswagen Stiftung.
REFERENCES

Avoli M and Gloor P. The effects of transient functional depression of the
thalamus on spindles and on bilateral synchronous epileptic discharges of
feline generalized penicillin epilepsy. Epilepsia 22: 443– 452, 1981.
Avoli M and Gloor P. Interaction of cortex and thalamus in spike and wave
discharges of feline generalized penicillin epilepsy. Exp Neurol 76: 196 –
217, 1982.
Bal T, Debay D, and Destexhe A. Cortical feedback controls the frequency
and synchrony of oscillations in the visual thalamus. J Neurosci 20:
7478 –7488, 2000.
Bal T and McCormick DA. Mechanisms of oscillatory activity in guinea-pig
nucleus reticularis thalami in vitro: a mammalian pacemaker. J Physiol 468:
669 – 691, 1993.
Bal T, von Krosigk M, and McCormick DA. Synaptic and membrane
mechanisms underlying synchronized oscillations in the ferret lateral geniculate nucleus in vitro. J Physiol 483: 641– 663, 1995a.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

Bal T, von Krosigk M, and McCormick DA. Role of the ferret perigeniculate
nucleus in the generation of synchronized oscillations in vitro. J Physiol
483: 665– 685, 1995b.
Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, and Sejnowski TJ. Model of
thalamocortical slow-wave sleep oscillations and transitions to activated
states. J Neurosci 22: 8691– 8704, 2002.
Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, and Sejnowski TJ. Potassium model
for slow (2–3 Hz) in vivo neocortical paroxysmal oscillations. J Neurophysiol 92: 1116 –1132, 2004.
Beierlein M, Fall CP, Rinzel J, and Yuste R. Thalamocortical bursts trigger
recurrent activity in neocortical networks: layer 4 as a frequency-dependent
gate. J Neurosci 22: 9885–9894, 2002.
Birtoli B and Ulrich D. Firing mode-dependent synaptic plasticity in rat
neocortical pyramidal neurons. J Neurosci 24: 4935– 4940, 2004.
Blatow M, Rozov A, Katona I, Hormuzdi SG, Meyer AH, Whittington
MA, Caputi A, and Monyer H. A novel network of multipolar bursting
interneurons generates theta frequency oscillations in neocortex. Neuron 38:
805– 817, 2003.
Blethyn KL, Hughes SW, Cope DW, and Crunelli V. The role of ionic
conductances underlying a slow (Ͻ1 Hz) oscillation in neurons of the
thalamic reticular nucleus in vitro. Soc Neurosci Abstr 699.3, 2003.
Bragin A, Engel J Jr, Wilson CL, Fried I, and Mathern GW. Hippocampal
and entorhinal cortex high-frequency oscillations (100 –500 Hz) in human
epileptic brain and in kainic acid-treated rats with chronic seizures. Epilepsia 40: 127–137, 1999.
Bruzzone R, Hormuzdi SG, Barbe MT, Herb A, and Monyer H. Pannexins,
a family of gap junction proteins expressed in brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
100: 13644 –13649, 2003.
Buhl EH, Tama´s G, and Fisahn A. Cholinergic activation and tonic excitation induce persistent gamma oscillations in mouse somatosensory cortex in
vitro. J Physiol 513: 117–126, 1998.
Bush P and Sejnowski TJ. Inhibition synchronizes sparsely connected cortical neurons within and between columns in realistic network models.
J Comput Neurosci 3: 91–110, 1996.
Castro-Alamancos MA. Origin of synchronized oscillations induced by
neocortical disinhibition in vivo. J Neurosci 20: 9195–9206, 2000.
Castro-Alamancos MA and Rigas P. Synchronized oscillations caused by
disinhibition in rodent neocortex are generated by recurrent synaptic activity
mediated by AMPA receptors. J Physiol 542: 567–581, 2002.
Contreras D, Curro´ Dossi R, and Steriade M. Electrophysiological properties of cat reticular thalamic neurones in vivo. J Physiol 470: 273–294, 1993.
Contreras D, Destexhe A, Sejnowski TJ, and Steriade M. Control of
spatiotemporal coherence of a thalamic oscillation by corticothalamic feedback. Science 274: 771–774, 1996.
Contreras D and Steriade M. Spindle oscillation in cats: the role of corticothalamic feedback in a thalamically generated rhythm. J Physiol 490:
159 –179, 1996.
Crunelli V and Leresche N. Childhood absence epilepsy: genes, channels,
neurons and networks. Nat Rev Neurosci 3: 371–382, 2002.
Cunningham MO, Halliday DM, Davies CH, Traub RD, Buhl EH, and
Whittington MA. Coexistence of gamma and high-frequency oscillations in
the medial entorhinal cortex in vitro. J Physiol 559: 347–353, 2004b.
Cunningham MO, Whittington MA, Bibbig A, Roopun A, LeBeau FEN,
Vogt A, Monyer H, Buhl EH, and Traub RD. A role for fast rhythmic
bursting neurons in cortical gamma oscillations in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 101: 7152–7157, 2004a.
Descheˆnes M. Dendritic spikes induced in fast pyramidal tract neurons by
thalamic stimulation. Exp Brain Res 43: 304 –308, 1981.
Descheˆnes M, Paradis M, Roy JP, and Steriade M. Electrophysiology of
neurons of lateral thalamic nuclei in cat: resting properties and burst
discharges. J Neurophysiol 51: 1196 –1219, 1984.
Destexhe A, Bal T, McCormick DA, and Sejnowski TJ. Ionic mechanisms
underlying synchronized oscillations and propagating waves in a model of
ferret thalamic slices. J Neurophysiol 76: 2049 –2070, 1996.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, and Steriade M. Mechanisms underlying the
synchronizing action of corticothalamic feedback through inhibition of
thalamic relay cells. J Neurophysiol 79: 999 –1016, 1998.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, and Steriade M. Cortically-induced coherence of
a thalamic-generated oscillation. Neuroscience 92: 427– 443, 1999.
Dichter M and Spencer WA. Penicillin-induced interictal discharges from the
cat hippocampus. I. Characteristics and topographical features. J Neurophysiol 32: 649 – 662, 1969.
Douglas RJ and Martin KAC. A functional microcircuit for cat visual cortex.
J Physiol 440: 735–769, 1991.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

neurons favors the initial synchronization of bursting in excitatory neurons, in partially disinhibited cortex. Second, if
recurrent synaptic excitation between spiny stellates is especially strong (either from large AMPA receptor currents, or
from relatively voltage-independent NMDA receptors), then
bursts become prolonged, or can even evolve into multiple
bursts (polyspikes). Both in model and in experiment (Figs. 7,
8, 14, and 15), spiny stellate firing is nearly continuous during
polyspikes. Of course, recurrent excitatory synaptic connections between pyramidal cells are critically important for epileptogenesis in our model (data not shown), as is the case in
experimental epilepsy models (except for the hyperexcitability
induced by low extracellular calcium concentration) (reviewed
in Traub and Miles 1991).
Recurrent synaptic excitation between layer 4 spiny stellate
cells (in visual and somatosensory cortices) has been proposed
to enhance “responses to effect stimuli” coming into cortex
from the thalamus (Miller et al. 2001). Whether this hypothesis
is correct or incorrect, one assumes that Nature has emplaced
the layer 4 recurrent excitatory system for a functional reason.
Strong recurrent synaptic excitation between layer 4 neurons
may be counterbalanced by the ability of the synapses to
undergo long-term depression that is dependent on mGluR2
receptors (Egger et al. 1999): one wonders whether such LTD
is ineffective in individuals predisposed to seizures containing
polyspikes and/or fast runs. It is possible that a drug therapy
aimed at preventing excessive recurrent excitation between
spiny stellate neurons—possibly one that targets NR2C receptors (Fleidervish et al. 1998)— could have useful antiepileptic
effects. A possible result of such targeting could be the prevention of polyspikes and fast runs, the characteristic interictal
and ictal EEG abnormalities in certain epilepsies, including
juvenile myoclonic epilepsy or Janz syndrome (Pedersen and
Petersen 1998), and Lennox–Gastaut syndrome (Markand
2003; Steriade 2003).

2211

2212

TRAUB ET AL.

J Neurophysiol • VOL

Ko¨hling R, Gladwell SJ, Bracci E, Vreugdenhil M, and Jefferys JGR.
Prolonged epileptiform bursting induced by 0-Mg2ϩ in rat hippocampal
slices depends on gap junctional coupling. Neuroscience 105: 579 –587,
2001.
Landisman CE, Long MA, Beierlein M, Deans MR, Paul DL, and Connors
BW. Electrical synapses in the thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurosci 22:
1002–1009, 2002.
Llina´s R. The intrinsic electrophysiological properties of mammalian neurons:
insights into central nervous system function. Science 242: 1654 –1664,
1988.
Llina´s RR, Grace AA, and Yarom Y. In vitro neurons in mammalian cortical
layer 4 exhibit intrinsic oscillatory activity in the 10- to 50-Hz range. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 88: 897–901, 1991.
Long MA, Landisman CE, and Connors BW. Small clusters of electrically
coupled neurons generate synchronous rhythms in the thalamic reticular
nucleus. J Neurosci 24: 341–349, 2004.
Luhmann HJ, Mittmann T, van Luijtelaar G, and Heinemann U. Impairment of intracortical GABAergic inhibition in a rat model of absence
epilepsy. Epilepsy Res 22: 43–51, 1995.
Lu¨thi A and McCormick DA. Periodicity of thalamic synchronized oscillations: the role of Ca2ϩ-mediated upregulation of Ih. Neuron 20: 553–563,
1998.
Lytton WW, Contreras D, Destexhe A, and Steriade M. Dynamic interactions determine partial thalamic quiescence in a computer network model of
spike-and-wave seizures. J Neurophysiol 77: 1679 –1696, 1997.
Marder E. Roles for electrical coupling in neural circuits as revealed by
selective neuronal deletions. J Exp Biol 112: 147–167, 1984.
Markand ON. Lennox–Gastaut syndrome (childhood epileptic encephalopathy). J Clin Neurophysiol 20: 426 – 441, 2003.
Matsumoto H and Ajmone Marsan C. Cortical cellular phenomena in
experimental epilepsy: interictal manifestations. Exp Neurol 9: 286 –304,
1964.
McCormick DA, Connors BW, Lighthall JW, and Prince DA. Comparative
electrophysiology of pyramidal and sparsely spiny stellate neurons of the
neocortex. J Neurophysiol 54: 782– 806, 1982.
Metherate R and Cruikshank SJ. Thalamocortical inputs trigger a propagating envelope of gamma-band activity in auditory cortex in vitro. Exp
Brain Res 126: 160 –174, 1999.
Miles R and Wong RKS. Excitatory synaptic interactions between CA3
neurones in the guinea-pig hippocampus. J Physiol 373: 397– 418, 1986.
Miles R and Wong RKS. Inhibitory control of local excitatory circuits in the
guinea-pig hippocampus. J Physiol 388: 611– 629, 1987.
Miller KD, Pinto DJ, and Simons DJ. Processing in layer 4 of the neocortical
circuit: new insights from visual and somatosensory cortex. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 11: 488 – 497, 2001.
Nowak LG, Azouz R, Sanchez-Vives MV, Gray CM, and McCormick DA.
Electrophysiological classes of cat primary visual cortical neurons in vivo as
revealed by quantitative analyses. J Neurophysiol 89: 1541–1566, 2003.
Nun˜ez A, Amzica F, and Steriade M. Voltage-dependent fast (20 – 40 Hz)
oscillations in long-axoned neocortical neurons. Neuroscience 51: 7–10,
1992.
Pedersen SB and Petersen KA. Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy: clinical and
EEG features. Acta Neurol Scand 97: 160 –163, 1998.
Perez-Velazquez JL, Valiante TA, and Carlen PL. Modulation of gap
junctional mechanisms during calcium-free induced field burst activity: a
possible role for electrotonic coupling in epileptogenesis. J Neurosci 14:
4308 – 4317, 1994.
Pinault D and Descheˆnes M. Voltage-dependent 40-Hz oscillations in rat
reticular thalamic neurons in vivo. Neuroscience 51: 245–258, 1992.
Pinault D, Leresche N, Charpier S, Deniau JM, Marescaux C, Vergnes M,
and Crunelli V. Intracellular recordings in thalamic neurones during spontaneous spike and wave discharges in rats with absence epilepsy. J Physiol
509: 449 – 456, 1998.
Pinto DJ, Jones SR, Kaper TJ, and Kopell N. Analysis of state-dependent
transitions in frequency and long-distance coordination in a model oscillatory cortical circuit. J Comput Neurosci 15: 283–298, 2003.
Porter JT, Johnson CK, and Agmon A. Diverse types of interneurons
generate thalamus-evoked feedforward inhibition in the mouse barrel cortex.
J Neurosci 21: 2699 –2710, 2001.
Prince DA. The depolarization shift in “epileptic” neurons. Exp Neurol 21:
467– 485, 1968.
Ross FM, Gwyn P, Spanswick D, and Davies SN. Carbenoxolone depresses
spontaneous epileptiform activity in the CA1 region of rat hippocampal
slices. Neuroscience 100: 789 –796, 2000.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

Egger V, Feldmeyer D, and Sakmann B. Coincidence detection and changes
of synaptic efficacy in spiny stellate neurons in rat barrel cortex. Nat
Neurosci 2: 1098 –1105, 1999.
Feldmeyer D, Egger V, Lu¨bke J, and Sakmann B. Reliable synaptic
connections between pairs of excitatory layer 4 neurones within a single
“barrel” of developing rat somatosensory cortex. J Physiol 521: 169 –190,
1999.
Fisahn A, Pike FG, Buhl EH, and Paulsen O. Cholinergic induction of
network oscillations at 40 Hz in the hippocampus in vitro. Nature 394:
186 –189, 1998.
Fleidervish IA, Binshtok AM, and Gutnick MJ. Functionally distinct
NMDA receptors mediate horizontal connectivity within layer 4 of mouse
barrel cortex. Neuron 21: 1055–1065, 1998.
Fuentealba P, Crochet S, Timofeev I, Bazhenov M, Sejnowski TJ, and
Steriade M. Experimental evidence and modeling studies support a synchronizing role for electrical coupling in the cat thalamic reticular nucleus in
vivo. Eur J Neurosci 20: 111–119, 2004.
Gloor P, Quesney LF, and Zumstein H. Pathophysiology of generalized
penicillin epilepsy in the cat: the role of cortical and subcortical structures.
II. Topical application of penicillin to the cerebral cortex and to subcortical
structures. Electroenceph Clin Neurophysiol 43: 79 –94, 1977.
Golomb D and Amitai Y. Propagating neuronal discharges in neocortical
slices: computational and experimental study. J Neurophysiol 78: 1199 –
1211, 1997.
Grenier F, Timofeev I, and Steriade M. Focal synchronization of ripples
(80 –200 Hz) in neocortex and their neuronal correlates. J Neurophysiol 86:
1884 –1898, 2001.
Grenier F, Timofeev I, and Steriade M. Neocortical very fast oscillations
(ripples, 80 –200 Hz) during seizures: intracellular correlates. J Neurophysiol 89: 841– 852, 2003.
Gutnick MJ, Connors BW, and Prince DA. Mechanisms of neocortical
epileptogenesis in vitro. J Neurophysiol 48: 1321–1335, 1982.
Gutnick MJ, Lobel-Yaakov R, and Rimon G. Incidence of neuronal dyecoupling in neocortical slices depends on the plane of section. Neuroscience
15: 659 – 666, 1985.
Gutnick MJ and Prince DA. Dye coupling and possible electrotonic coupling
in the guinea pig neocortical slice. Science 211: 67–70, 1981.
Hoffman SN, Salin PA, and Prince DA. Chronic neocortical epileptogenesis
in vitro. J Neurophysiol 71: 1762–1773, 1994.
Hormuzdi SG, Pais I, LeBeau FEN, Towers SK, Rozov A, Buhl EH,
Whittington MA, and Monyer H. Impaired electrical signaling disrupts
gamma frequency oscillations in connexin 36-deficient mice. Neuron 31:
487– 495, 2001.
Hughes SW, Blethyn KL, Cope DW, and Crunelli V. Properties and origin
of spikelets in thalamocortical neurones in vitro. Neuroscience 110: 395–
401, 2002a.
Hughes SW, Cope DW, Blethyn KL, and Crunelli V. Cellular mechanisms
of the slow (Ͻ1 Hz) oscillation in thalamocortical neurons in vitro. Neuron
33: 947–958, 2002b.
Hughes SW, Lo¨rincz M, Cope DW, Blethyn KL, Ke´kesi KA, Parri HR,
Juha´sz G, and Crunelli V. Synchronized oscillations at ␣ and ␪ frequencies
in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Neuron 42: 1–20, 2004.
Jahnsen H and Llina´s R. Electrophysiological properties of guinea-pig
thalamic neurones: an in vitro study. J Physiol 349: 205–226, 1984a.
Jahnsen H and Llina´s R. Ionic basis for the electroresponsiveness and
oscillatory properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurones in vitro. J Physiol
349: 227–247, 1984b.
Jahromi SS, Wentlandt K, Piran S, and Carlen PL. Anticonvulsant actions
of gap junctional blockers in an in vitro seizure model. J Neurophysiol 88:
1893–1902, 2002.
Jones MS and Barth DS. Spatiotemporal organization of fast (Ͼ200 Hz)
electrical oscillations in rat vibrissa/barrel cortex. J Neurophysiol 82: 1599 –
1609, 1999.
Jones MS and Barth DS. Effects of bicuculline methiodide on fast (Ͼ200 Hz)
electrical oscillations in rat somatosensory cortex. J Neurophysiol 88:
1016 –1025, 2002.
Jones MS, MacDonald KD, Choi B, Dudek FE, and Barth DS. Intracellular
correlates of fast (Ͼ200 Hz) electrical oscillations in rat somatosensory
cortex. J Neurophysiol 84: 1505–1518, 2000.
Kawaguchi Y. Distinct firing patterns of neuronal subtypes in cortical synchronized activities. J Neurosci 21: 7261–7272, 2001.
Kim U and McCormick DA. Functional and ionic properties of a slow
afterhyperpolarization in ferret perigeniculate neurons in vitro. J Neurophysiol 80: 1222–1235, 1998.

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

J Neurophysiol • VOL

Traub RD, Bibbig A, Fisahn A, LeBeau FEN, Whittington MA, and Buhl
EH. A model of gamma-frequency network oscillations induced in the rat
CA3 region by carbachol in vitro. Eur J Neurosci 12: 4093– 4106, 2000.
Traub RD, Buhl EH, Gloveli T, and Whittington MA. Fast rhythmic
bursting can be induced in layer 2/3 cortical neurons by enhancing Naϩ
conductance or by blocking BK channels. J Neurophysiol 89: 909 –921,
2003c.
Traub RD, Cunningham MO, Gloveli T, LeBeau FEN, Bibbig A, Buhl EH,
and Whittington MA. GABA-enhanced collective behavior in neuronal
axons underlies persistent gamma-frequency oscillations. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 100: 11047–11052, 2003b.
Traub RD, Draguhn A, Whittington MA, Baldeweg T, Bibbig A, Buhl EH,
and Schmitz D. Axonal gap junctions between principal neurons: a novel
source of network oscillations, and perhaps epileptogenesis. Rev Neurosci
13: 1–30, 2002.
Traub RD, Jefferys JGR, Miles R, Whittington MA, and To´th K. A
branching dendritic model of a rodent CA3 pyramidal neurone. J Physiol
481: 79 –95, 1994.
Traub RD and Miles R. Neuronal Networks of the Hippocampus. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1991.
Traub RD, Pais I, Bibbig A, LeBeau FEN, Buhl EH, Hormuzdi SG,
Monyer H, and Whittington MA. Contrasting roles of axonal (pyramidal
cell) and dendritic (interneuron) electrical coupling in the generation of
gamma oscillations in the hippocampus in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
100: 1370 –1374, 2003a.
Traub RD, Schmitz D, Jefferys JGR, and Draguhn A. High-frequency
population oscillations are predicted to occur in hippocampal pyramidal
neuronal networks interconnected by axoaxonal gap junctions. Neuroscience
92: 407– 426, 1999.
Traub RD, Whittington MA, Buhl EH, LeBeau FEN, Bibbig A, Boyd S,
Cross H, and Baldeweg T. A possible role for gap junctions in generation
of very fast EEG oscillations preceding the onset of, and perhaps initiating,
seizures. Epilepsia 42: 153–170, 2001.
Traub RD and Wong RKS. Cellular mechanism of neuronal synchronization
in epilepsy. Science 216: 745–747, 1982.
Ulrich D and Huguenard JR. GABAA-receptor-mediated rebound burst
firing and burst shunting in thalamus. J Neurophysiol 78: 1748 –1751, 1997.
von Krosigk M, Bal T, and McCormick DA. Cellular mechanisms of a
synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science 261: 361–364, 1993.
Wang XJ and Rinzel J. Spindle rhythmicity in the reticularis thalami nucleus:
synchronization among mutually inhibitory neurons. Neuroscience 53: 899 –
904, 1993.
Wang Y, Gupta A, Toledo-Rodriguez M, Wu CZ, and Markram H.
Anatomical, physiological, molecular and circuit properties of nest basket
cells in the developing somatosensory cortex. Cereb Cortex 12: 395– 410,
2002.
Whittington MA and Traub RD. Inhibitory interneurons and network oscillations in vitro. Trends Neurosci 26: 676 – 682, 2003.
Whittington MA, Traub RD, and Jefferys JGR. Synchronized oscillations
in interneuron networks driven by metabotropic glutamate receptor activation. Nature 373: 612– 615, 1995.
Williams SR, Stuart GJ. Mechanisms and consequences of action potential
burst firing in rat neocortical pyramidal neurons. J Physiol 521: 467– 482,
1999.
Ylinen A, Bragin A, Na´dasdy Z, Jando´ G, Szabo´ I, Sik A, and Buzsa´ki G.
Sharp wave-associated high frequency oscillation (200 Hz) in the intact
hippocampus: network and intracellular mechanisms. J Neurosci 15: 30 – 46,
1995.
APPENDIX A

Single-cell models
The network model used the following component model neurons
(Fig. 1 of main text), each with a single-compartment soma, a
6-compartment branched axon, and multiple dendritic compartments:
1) superficial (layer 2/3) RS pyramidal cell, 74 compartments
2) superficial (layer 2/3) FRB pyramidal cell, 74 compartments
3) superficial basket cell, 59 compartments
4) superficial axoaxonic (chandelier) cell, 59 compartments
5) superficial LTS interneuron, 59 compartments
6) layer 4 spiny stellate cell, 59 compartments
7) layer 5 tufted IB pyramidal cell, 61 compartments

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

Sawa M, Maruyama N, and Kaji S. Intracellular potential during electrically
induced seizures. Electroenceph Clin Neurophysiol 15: 209 –220, 1963.
Schiller Y. Inter-ictal and ictal-like epileptic discharges in the dendritic tree of
neocortical pyramidal neurons. J Neurophysiol 88: 2954 –2962, 2002.
Schmitz D, Schuchmann S, Fisahn A, Draguhn A, Buhl EH, PetraschParwez RE, Dermietzel R, Heinemann U, and Traub RD. Axo-axonal
coupling: a novel mechanism for ultrafast neuronal communication. Neuron
31: 831– 840, 2001.
Schweitzer JS, Wang H, Xiong ZQ, and Stringer JL. pH Sensitivity of
non-synaptic field bursts in the dentate gyrus. J Neurophysiol 84: 927–933,
2000.
Slaght SJ, Leresche N, Deniau JM, Crunelli V, and Charpier S. Activity of
thalamic reticular neurons during spontaneous genetically determined spike
and wave discharges. J Neurosci 22: 2323–2334, 2002.
Snow RW and Dudek FE. Electrical fields directly contribute to action
potential synchronization during convulsant-induced epileptiform bursts.
Brain Res 323: 114 –118, 1984.
Staba RJ, Wilson CL, Bragin A, Jhung D, Fried I, and Engel J Jr.
High-frequency oscillations recorded in human medial temporal lobe during
sleep. Ann Neurol 56: 108 –115, 2004.
Steriade M. The Intact and Sliced Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
Steriade M. Neuronal Substrates of Sleep and Epilepsy. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
Steriade M, Amzica F, and Contreras D. Synchronization of fast (30 – 40
Hz) spontaneous cortical rhythms during brain activation. J Neurosci 16:
392– 417, 1996.
Steriade M, Amzica F, Neckelmann D, and Timofeev I. Spike-wave complexes and fast components of cortically generated seizures. II. Extra- and
intracellular patterns. J Neurophysiol 80: 1456 –1479, 1998a.
Steriade M and Contreras D. Relations between cortical and thalamic
cellular events during transition from sleep patterns to paroxysmal activity.
J Neurosci 15: 623– 642, 1995.
Steriade M and Contreras D. Spike-wave complexes and fast components of
cortically generated seizures. I. Role of neocortex and thalamus. J Neurophysiol 80: 1439 –1455, 1998.
Steriade M, Contreras D, Amzica F, and Timofeev I. Synchronization of
fast (30 – 40 Hz) spontaneous oscillations in intrathalamic and thalamocortical networks. J Neurosci 16: 2788 –2808, 1996.
Steriade M, Curro´ Dossi R, and Contreras D. Electrophysiological properties of intralaminar thalamocortical cells discharging rhythmic (ϳ40 Hz)
spike-bursts at ϳ1000 Hz during waking and rapid eye movement sleep.
Neuroscience 56: 1–9, 1993.
Steriade M, Domich L, Oakson G, and Descheˆnes M. The deafferented
reticular thalamic nucleus generates spindle rhythmicity. J Neurophysiol 57:
260 –273, 1987.
Steriade M, Nun˜ez A, and Amzica F. A novel slow (Ͻ1 Hz) oscillation of
neocortical neurons in vivo: depolarizing and hyperpolarizing components.
J Neurosci 13: 3266 –3283, 1993.
Steriade M, Timofeev I, Du¨rmu¨ller, and Grenier F. Dynamic properties of
corticothalamic neurons and local cortical interneurons generating fast
rhythmic (30 – 40 Hz) spike bursts. J Neurophysiol 79: 483– 490, 1998b.
Swadlow HA. Fast-spike interneurons and feedforward inhibition in awake
sensory neocortex. Cereb Cortex 13: 25–32, 2003.
Szente M, Gajda Z, Ali KS, and Hermesz E. Involvement of electrical
coupling in the in vivo ictal epileptiform activity induced by 4-aminopyridine in the neocortex. Neuroscience 115: 1067–1078, 2002.
Thomson AM and Bannister AP. Electrical gap junctions involving somata
and axons of neocortical and hippocampal pyramidal cells. Abstr Soc
Neurosci 403: 13, 2004.
Timofeev I, Grenier F, and Steriade M. Spike-wave complexes and fast
components of cortically generated seizures. IV. Paroxysmal fast runs in
cortical and thalamic neurons. J Neurophysiol 80: 1495–1513, 1998.
Timofeev I, Grenier F, and Steriade M. Contribution of intrinsic neuronal
factors in the generation of cortically driven electrographic seizures. J Neurophysiol 92: 1133–1143, 2004.
Timofeev I and Steriade M. Low-frequency rhythms in the thalamus of
intact-cortex and decorticated cats. J Neurophysiol 76: 4152– 4168, 1996.
Topolnik L, Steriade M, and Timofeev I. Partial cortical deafferentation
promotes development of paroxysmal activity. Cereb Cortex 13: 883– 893,
2003.
Traub RD and Bibbig A. A model of high-frequency ripples in the hippocampus, based on synaptic coupling plus axon-axon gap junctions between
pyramidal neurons. J Neurosci 20: 2086 –2093, 2000.

2213

2214
TABLE

TRAUB ET AL.

A1. Membrane conductance densities for superficial RS pyramidal cells (mS/cm2), by level in model structure

Level

gNa(F)

gNa(P)

gK(DR)

gK(C)

gK(A)

gK(M)

gK2

gK(AHP)

gCa(L)

gCa(T)

gAR

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

400
187.5
93.75
12.5
12.5
125
93.75
12.5
12.5
12.5
12.5
12.5
12.5

0
0.12
0.06
0.008
0.008
0.08
0.06
0.008
0.008
0.008
0.008
0.008
0.008

400
125
93.75
6.25
6.25
125
93.75
6.25
6.25
6.25
6.25
6.25
6.25

0
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12

2
30
2
2
2
30
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

0
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25

Explanation of levels: level 0 ϭ axon; level 1 ϭ soma; level 2 ϭ proximal basal and oblique dendrites; level 3 ϭ middle basal and oblique dendrites; level
4 ϭ distal basal and oblique dendrites; levels 5–12 ϭ progressively more distal apical dendrites.

TABLE

1) Several different cell types use identical compartmental topology (e.g., superficial RS and FRB pyramids, or all GABAergic cells
and spiny stellates).
2) Within a given cell model, the compartments are lumped into a
series of “levels,” following earlier practice (Traub et al. 1994), and
all compartments in a particular level have the same membrane
conductance densities.
3) There is a standard repertoire of 11 active conductances used by
all of the cells; however, the membrane density distributions, and
perhaps details of kinetics, are adjusted for each type of cell. The
conductances used were as described in Traub et al. 2003 and
Cunningham et al. 2004: fast (transient) gNa(F), persistent gNa(P),
delayed rectifier gK(DR), rapid voltage- and [Ca2ϩ]i-dependent gK(C),
transient inactivating gK(A), gK(M), gK2, slow [Ca2ϩ]i-dependent
gK(AHP), high-threshold gCa(L), low-threshold inactivating gCa(T), and
the anomolous rectifier or h-conductance gAR. There were 2 sorts of
gNa kinetics, one for glutamatergic cells (other than spiny stellates) (as
in Traub et al. 2003) and the other for spiny stellates and GABAergic
cells (as described in the supplemental material for Cunningham et al.
2004). Both types of gNa kinetics are based on quantitative data in
Martina and Jonas (1997). Similarly, there were 2 sorts of gK(DR)
kinetics, respectively gCa(T) kinetics, one for glutamatergic cells other
than spiny stellates (as in Traub et al. 2003), and one for spiny
stellates and GABAergic cells (as in Cunningham et al. 2004). gK(DR)
kinetics are based on data in Martina et al. (1998). gCa(T) kinetics for
glutamatergic cells (most important, TCR cells) used data in Destexhe
et al. 1998; gCa(T) kinetics for GABAergic cells (most important, nRT
cells) used data in Destexhe et al. (1996).

A2. Membrane conductance densities for superficial FRB pyramidal cells (mS/cm2), by level in model structure

Level

gNa(F)

gNa(P)

gK(DR)

gK(C)

gK(A)

gK(M)

gK2

gK(AHP)

gCa(L)

gCa(T)

gAR

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

400
187.5
93.75
12.5
12.5
125
93.75
12.5
12.5
12.5
12.5
12.5
12.5

0
0.48
0.24
0.032
0.032
0.32
0.24
0.032
0.032
0.032
0.032
0.032
0.032

400
125
93.75
6.25
6.25
125
93.75
6.25
6.25
6.25
6.25
6.25
6.25

0
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5

2
30
2
2
2
30
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

0
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25

Explanation of levels: level 0 ϭ axon; level 1 ϭ soma; level 2 ϭ proximal basal and oblique dendrites; level 3 ϭ middle basal and oblique dendrites; level
4 ϭ distal basal and oblique dendrites; levels 5–12 ϭ progressively more distal apical dendrites.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

8) layer 5 tufted RS pyramidal cell, 61 compartments
9) layer 6 nontufted RS pyramidal cell, 50 compartments
10) deep basket cell, 59 compartments
11) deep axoaxonic cell, 59 compartments
12) deep LTS interneuron, 59 compartments
13) thalamocortical relay (TCR) cell, 137 compartments
14) nucleus reticularis (nRT) cell, 59 compartments
The pyramids, spiny stellates, and TCR cells are glutamatergic, so
that firing of their axons activates AMPA/kainate and NMDA receptors on postsynaptic cells. The cortical interneurons and nRT cells are
GABAergic cells that activate GABAA receptors on postsynaptic
cells. GABAB receptors were not simulated.
Different cortical layers exhibit far more diversity in neuronal
morphology and connectivity than could be incorporated into this
model; to cite one example, somatosensory layer 6 pyramids have
different dendritic morphology and intracortical connectivity, depending on whether they connect to the thalamus (Zhang and
Descheˆnes 1997). In addition, this (first version) of the model does
not include interneurons within layer 4 itself (although such
interneurons do exist; Tarczy-Hornoch et al. 1998), nor does it
include layer 4 star pyramids, cells that have dendritic extensions
into layer 2/3. Layer 4 pyramids seem to be the category of layer
4 excitatory neuron most likely to receive cortical excitatory inputs
from outside layer 4 (Schubert et al. 2003); in our model, we
placed such inputs onto the spiny stellates.
The neuron models incorporate a number of symmetries, thereby
helping to reduce the very large number of parameters; note the
following examples.

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

2215

High-threshold calcium conductance kinetics came from Kay and
Wong (1987). Persistent gNa had rapid activation kinetics, but a
lower activation threshold, than did transient gNa (Kay et al. 1998);
it did not inactivate.

Some electrotonic parameters
Soma/dendritic membrane resistivity was 50,000 ⍀-cm2 for
cortical glutamatergic cells; 25,000 ⍀-cm2 for cortical GABAergic
cells; 26,400 ⍀-cm2 for TCR cells; and 20,000 ⍀-cm2 for nRT
cells. Soma/dendritic internal resistivity was 250 ⍀-cm for cortical
glutamatergic cells; 200 ⍀-cm for cortical GABAergic cells and
nRT cells; and 175 ⍀-cm for TCR cells. Membrane capacitance
density was 0.9 ␮F/cm2 for all glutamatergic cells and 1.0 ␮F/cm2
for all GABAergic cells. Axonal membrane and internal resistivities were smaller than for soma/dendrites: 1,000 ⍀-cm2 and 100
⍀-cm, respectively.

Reversal potentials
FIG.

In our single-cell models, axonal and somatodendritic gNa use the
same kinetics, and axonal spike initiation is realized by an increased
gNa density in the axons (Mainen et al. 1995). It may be, however,
that—as postulated in the historic model of Dodge and Cooley
(1973)—axonal gNa has a lower threshold than that of somatodendritic
gNa, at least in layer 5 pyramidal neurons (Colbert and Pan 2002), an
effect we did not simulate.

VNa was ϩ50 mV for all cell types. VCa was ϩ125 mV for all
types. VL (the reversal potential for the leak conductance) was Ϫ65
mV for FS and LTS interneurons, and for spiny stellates; it was Ϫ75
mV for nRT cells; it was Ϫ70 mV for cortical pyramids and TCR
neurons. VAR (the reversal potential for the anomalous rectifier, or h
conductance) was Ϫ40 mV for all GABAergic cells and spiny
stellates; it was Ϫ35 mV for cortical pyramids and TCR cells. VK was
Ϫ100 mV for GABAergic neurons and for spiny stellates; it was Ϫ95
mV for cortical pyramids and TCR cells.

Other sources of kinetic data
A-current and h-current kinetics were based on data in Huguenard and McCormick (1992). The K2 current followed Huguenard
and McCormick (1992) and McCormick and Huguenard (1992),
with some simplifications: only the faster component of inactivation was used, and the activation variable m was first order.

FIG. A2. FS and LTS firing behaviors in model neurons (0.4 nA
depolarizing current pulses to somata), in neurons in layer 2/3 rat auditory
cortex in vitro (0.5 nA current pulses), and in neurons from rat somatosensory cortex in vivo. Model and in vitro data from Cunningham et al.
(2004). In vivo FS cell was from layer 5 and the in vivo LTS cell was from
the layer 4/layer 5 border.

J Neurophysiol • VOL

FIG. A3. Firing behavior of model spiny stellate cell in response to
depolarizing current pulses, illustrating regular spiking (RS) behavior.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

A1. RS and FRB firing behaviors in model layer 2/3 pyramidal
neurons, in layer 2/3 putative pyramidal cells in rat auditory cortex in vitro,
and in neurons in rat somatosensory cortex in vivo. Cells were injected
with somatic depolarizing currents (0.4 and 0.75 nA for model, 0.5 nA for
in vitro experiment). Model and in vitro data from Cunningham et al.
(2004). In vivo RS cell was from layer 6, and the in vivo FRB cell from
layer 4.

2216
TABLE

TRAUB ET AL.

A3. Membrane conductance densities for spiny stellate cells (mS/cm2), by level in model structure

Level

gNa(F)

gNa(P)

gK(DR)

gK(C)

gK(A)

gK(M)

gK2

gK(AHP)

gCa(L)

gCa(T)

gAR

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

400
150
75
75
5
5
5
5
5
5

0.4
0.15
0.075
0.075
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005

400
100
75
75
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
10
10
10
10
0
0
0
0
0

2
30
30
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

0
3.75
3.75
3.75
3.75
3.75
3.75
3.75
3.75
3.75

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
3
3
3

0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25

Explanation of levels: level 0 ϭ axon; level 1 ϭ soma; levels 2–9 ϭ dendrites.

Calcium dynamics

Slow AHP time constants
The time constant for decay of the slow AHP conductance was 100
ms for superficial pyramidal cells (RS and FRB); for all other cells, it
was 1 s.

Superficial RS pyramidal cell
The properties of this cell model are as described in Traub et al.
(2003). Table A1 lists the conductance densities of the different
regions of the cell, for comparison with other cell models. The cell
architecture is shown in Fig. 1 of the main paper. In this model
neuron, the distance from soma to the tip of the apical dendrites is 400
␮m.
Layer 2/3 neurons are complicated in several ways: 1) their dendrites are capable of producing calcium-dependent bursts during
strong depolarization (Amitai et al.1993); 2) their axons appear to
generate more action potentials than somata (Traub et al. 2003); 3)
their intinsic firing properties are strongly dependent on the density of
certain membrane conductances and on depolarization (Brumberg et
al. 2000; Traub et al. 2003). In particular, RS behavior can be
converted into FRB behavior by increasing gNa(P), or by decreasing
gK(C), and FRB behavior is favored by strong membrane depolarization. FRB behavior does not appear to depend on calcium conductance(s). Firing of model and real (in vitro and in vivo) superficial RS
pyramidal cells, in response to depolarizing current pulses, is shown
in Fig. A1.

Superficial FRB pyramidal cell
FRB cells were included in the present model because—at least in
superficial cortical layers—FRB neurons appear to be necessary for
persistent gamma oscillations (Cunningham et al. 2004), an interesting type of collective behavior. In addition, FRB firing patterns have
been suggested to be important for cortical gamma oscillations that
appear transiently in visual cortex after visual stimulation (Gray and
J Neurophysiol • VOL

FIG. A4. Electrogenesis in the layer 5 tufted IB pyramidal cell model. A: cell
soma was held with a Ϫ0.2 nA current, and then a depolarizing current pulse was
applied. If the current was greater than about 1 nA, a burst would occur. Larger
currents evoked repetitive bursting. B: compartmental structure of the model,
indicating sites in the apical shaft referred to in C. C: calcium and sodium
electrogenesis in the model. A depolarizing current (bottom trace) was injected
into the distal apical trunk (D1). This led to a slow notched depolarization at D1
itself, in part produced by gCa, to a burst of action potentials at the soma (red), and
to a slow depolarization at D2 with notches that reflect “backpropagating” somatic
action potentials. Compare with Fig. 11 of Larkum et al. (2001).

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

[Ca2ϩ] was simulated in a thin shell beneath the soma-dendritic
membrane. This variable was used to gate calcium-dependent K
conductances. [Ca2ϩ] rises by the influx through high-threshold calcium channels, and then decays with first-order kinetics. The scaling
constants for [Ca2ϩ] rise are specific to each integration subroutine
and can be found in the code (variable “cafor”). The decay time
constants for the (unitless) [Ca2ϩ] are different in soma and dendrites,
and have the following values: for GABAergic neurons (FS, LTS,
nRT), and for spiny stellates and TCR cells, the decay time constant
was 50 ms in the soma and 20 ms in the dendrites; for superficial
pyramids (RS and FRB) and for layer 6 nontufted pyramids, the time
constants were 100 ms in the soma and 20 ms in the dendrites; for
tufted pyramids (IB and RS), the time constants were 100 ms in the
soma, 50 ms in the proximal dendrites, and 13.33 ms in all other
dendrites.

McCormick 1996). FRB cells were modeled, as were layer 2/3 RS
pyramidal cells, following Traub et al. (2003). Compared with the RS
layer 2/3 pyramidal cell described above, gNa(P) density has been
increased and gK(C) has been decreased (Table A2). Figure A1
illustrates an FRB response to an injected depolarizing current pulse,
in comparison with the FRB firing behavior of layer 2/3 putative
pyramidal cells in vitro and in vivo. In most network simulations,
FRB cells are held more depolarized than RS cells (0.25- to 0.35-nA
bias current for FRB cells, vs. Ϫ0.025 to Ϫ0.02 nA for layer 2/3 RS
cells).

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL
TABLE

2217

A4. Membrane conductance densities for tufted IB pyramidal cells (mS/cm2), by level in model structure

Level

gNa(F)

gNa(P)

gK(DR)

gK(C)

gK(A)

gK(M)

gK2

gK(AHP)

gCa(L)

gCa(T)

gAR

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18 prox
18 dist

450
200
75
15
15
150
75
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
3
3
3
3
3

0
0.16
0.06
0.012
0.012
0.12
0.06
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.0024
0.0024
0.0024
0.0024
0.0024

450
170
75
0
0
120
75
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
16
16
0.5
0.5
16
16
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2

0.6
20
8
0.6
0.6
8
8
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6

42
11.9
19.04
19.04
19.04
19.04
19.04
19.04
19.04
19.04
19.04
19.04
19.04
19.04
19.04
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.6
5.6

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

0
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2

0
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
4.5
1
1
1
2.7
0.6

0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2

Both superficial and
deep basket and axoaxonic cells had FS firing properties. The structure and conductance kinetics and densities are described in the
supplemental material of Cunningham et al. (2004). Figure A2 illustrates firing behavior in the model neuron, in response to a depolarizing current pulse.

BASKET AND AXOAXONIC INTERNEURONS.

These cells (Kawaguchi 1995) were modeled
as described in the supplemental material of Cunningham et al.
(2004), and firing behavior is illustrated in Fig. A2. The initial burst
is generated by low-threshold calcium channels (Goldberg et al.
2004). It was possible to convert the LTS model into an FRB
interneuron (Steriade et al. 1998) by increasing gNa(P) density and
gK(M) density, while slightly decreasing gK(C) density (data not
shown), but FRB interneurons were not incorporated into the present
network model. We were not able to convert FS interneurons into
FRB interneurons by similar manipulations of conductance densities.
LTS INTERNEURONS.

TABLE

These neurons are RS cells in our
model (Beierlein et al. 2003), although we are aware that at least some
spiny stellates can have IB properties (Connors and Gutnick 1990).
Our spiny stellates were modeled (because of the small size of these
neurons) as if they were interneurons, in terms of conductance kinetics
and compartmental structure, but with the surface area of dendritic
compartments doubled to allow for the spines (Major 1992), and with
gK(M) and gK(AHP) adjusted so that firing rate adaptation would occur
(Fig. A3, Table A3), i.e., so that the cells were “RS.” Note that the
spike AHPs are Ͻ10 mV, consistent with Fig. 2C of Porter et al.
(2001), but the AHP in the model neuron does have a small, fast
component that is not present in Fig. 2A of Porter et al. (2001). The
fast AHP in this model neuron is attributed in part to A current and
can be reduced by diminishing the density of the A type of conductance (not shown). We have also developed an alternative RS stellate
neuron model that uses principal cell gNa and gK(DR) kinetics; and that
SPINY STELLATE NEURONS.

A5. Membrane conductance densities for tufted RS pyramidal cells (mS/cm2), by level in model structure

Level

gNa(F)

gNa(P)

gK(DR)

gK(C)

gK(A)

gK(M)

gK2

gK(AHP)

gCa(L)

gCa(T)

gAR

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18 prox
18 dist

450
200
75
15
15
150
75
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
3
3
3
3
3

0
0.16
0.06
0.012
0.012
0.12
0.06
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.012
0.0024
0.0024
0.0024
0.0024
0.0024

450
170
75
0
0
120
75
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
28.8
28.8
0.9
0.9
28.8
28.8
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
2.16
2.16
2.16
2.16
2.16

0.6
20
8
0.6
0.6
8
8
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6

30
8.5
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
4
4
4
4
4

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

0
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2

0
1.6
1.6
1.6
1.6
1.6
1.6
1.6
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
1.08
0.24

0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2

Explanation of levels: level 0 ϭ axon; level 1 ϭ soma; level 2 ϭ proximal basal and oblique dendrites; level 3 ϭ middle basal and oblique dendrites; level
4 ϭ distal basal and oblique dendrites; levels 5–17 ϭ progressively more distal apical dendritic shaft; level 18 ϭ apical tuft.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

Explanation of levels: level 0 ϭ axon; level 1 ϭ soma; level 2 ϭ proximal basal and oblique dendrites; level 3 ϭ middle basal and oblique dendrites; level
4 ϭ distal basal and oblique dendrites; levels 5–17 ϭ progressively more distal apical dendritic shaft; level 18 ϭ apical tuft.

2218

TRAUB ET AL.

depends on high-threshold gCa(L).] Sodium spikes in these cells favor
apical dendritic bursts. Action potential amplitudes generally decrease
during the course of the burst at soma, and each spike is initiated in
the axon, in which there is no decrement of the amplitude (Williams
and Stuart 1999). In our model as well, fast spikes are initiated in the
axon (not shown). A burst of action potentials not only delivers more
spikes to distal presynaptic terminals than does a single spike (Williams and Stuart 1999); in addition, a postsynaptic burst paired with a
slightly delayed EPSP can unexpectedly lead to synaptic depression,
as opposed to the potentiation that occurs when the EPSP is paired
with a single spike (Birtoli and Ulrich 2004). Some of the complex
physiology of calcium electrogenesis in the distal apical dendrite may
be related to this phenomenon, along with the within-cell cooperativity between single somatic action potentials and apical EPSPs in
eliciting slow dendritic calcium spikes.
The compartmental structure of the tufted pyramidal cell (also used
for layer 5 RS pyramidal cells) is shown in Fig. A4. Dendritic lengths
are as follows: soma to basal tips, 180 ␮m; apical shaft to apical

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. A5. RS firing behavior in another type of layer 5 tufted pyramidal
neuron model used in our networks. Holding current was Ϫ0.4 nA.

uses comparable densitites of Naϩ channels between soma and axon,
while shifting the axonal voltage-dependent rate functions on the
voltage axis by 7 mV (Colbert and Pan 2002). The alternative model
was not, however, used in the simulations reported here.

Layer 5 tufted IB pyramidal cell
Electrogenesis in these neurons is quite complex, in part attributed
to the long tufted apical dendrite; to dendritic gCa, which permits slow
depolarizations and dendritic bursts; and to complex voltage-dependent interactions along the length of the axonal/somatic/apical shaft/
tuft axis (Kim and Connors 1993; Larkum and Zhu 2002; Larkum et
al. 1999; Rhodes and Llina´s 2001; Schiller et al. 1997; Stuart et al.
1997). Although bursting in these cells is gCa-dependent, the requisite
calcium channels may be Ni2ϩ blockable, and thus high-threshold T
channels (Williams and Stuart 1999); this possibility has also been
suggested for high-threshold dendritic calcium spikes in TCR cells
(Hughes et al. 2004). [In our model, however, dendritic bursting
J Neurophysiol • VOL

FIG. A6. Layer 6 nontufted pyramidal cell. A: compartmental architecture.
B: RS firing behavior in response to depolarizing currents (onset at ^), holding
current Ϫ0.25 nA. Note the tonic RS firing with 0.8-nA depolarizing current,
and burst-tonic firing with 1.0-nA depolarizing current, firing patterns that
have been described in rat layer 6 pyramidal cells (van Brederode and Snyder
1992).

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL
TABLE

2219

A6. Membrane conductance densities for nontufted RS pyramidal cells (mS/cm2), by level in model structure

Level

gNa(F)

gNa(P)

gK(DR)

gK(C)

gK(A)

gK(M)

gK2

gK(AHP)

gCa(L)

gCa(T)

gAR

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

450
200
75
5
5
150
75
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

0
0.08
0.03
0.002
0.002
0.06
0.03
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002

450
170
75
0
0
120
75
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
15
15
0
0
15
15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

4
122.5
13.6
13.6
13.6
122.5
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6
13.6

0
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2

0
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2

0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25

Explanation of levels: level 0 ϭ axon; level 1 ϭ soma; level 2 ϭ proximal basal and oblique dendrites; level 3 ϭ middle basal and oblique dendrites; level
4 ϭ distal basal and oblique dendrites; levels 5–14 ϭ progressively more distal apical dendrite.

Layer 6 nontufted RS pyramidal cell
Nontufted deep RS pyramidal cells have been electrophysiologically characterized and reconstructed by Mason and Larkman (1990)
and Kang and Kayano (1994). In visual cortex, nontufted layer 5 RS
pyramids include a subpopulation that projects through the corpus
callosum, whereas the tufted IB pyramids projected to the superior
colliculus (Kasper et al. 1994).
The structure of this type of model neuron is shown in Fig. A6,
conductance densities are listed in Table A6, and RS firing is shown
later in Fig. A6. Although our model uses such neurons in “layer 6,”
in fact there are many neurons of this sort in layer 5; our model is
intended to resemble the structure of the cell in Fig. 4B of Mason and
Larkman (1990). The basal dendrites extend 180 ␮m from the soma,
the oblique dendrites 180 ␮m from the apical shaft, and the apical
dendrite is 500 ␮m long. The kinetics of membrane conductances is
as for layer 2/3 pyramidal cells (Traub et al. 2003).
This model neuron can be converted to one with FRB behavior
by increasing the density of gNa(P), and blocking gK(C) (not shown).
We did not use, in our network, deep FRB thalamus-projecting
pyramidal cells, although such cells do exist in the cat (Steriade et
al. 1998).

Layer 5 tufted RS pyramidal cells
Not all tufted layer 5 pyramidal neurons are intrinsically bursting. Rather, at least some of them have RS firing properties
(Markram et al. 1995; Williams and Stuart 1999). Our model used
the same compartmental architecture as that for layer 5 tufted IB
pyramids (see above), and usual gK(A) kinetics. The density of
various conductances [particularly gCa(L)], however, was different
between the 2 models (Table A5). RS firing behavior is shown in
Fig. A5. The layer 5 tufted RS pyramidal neuron could be converted into an FRB neuron by increasing the density of gNa(P), and
decreasing the density of gK(C) (not shown), but such models were
not used in the present network.
TABLE

Thalamocortical relay (TCR) cell
These cells have multiple stubby dendrites and complex forms of
electrogenesis, involving interactions between fast spikes, lowthreshold calcium spikes (whose main conductance appears located
in dendrites, but not distal dendrites; Destexhe et al. 1998; Williams and Stuart 2000), h current (hyperpolarization-activated
current, or anomolous rectifier; McCormick and Pape 1990), and
dendritic high-threshold calcium conductance (Hughes et al. 2004;
Kammermeier and Jones 1997; Pedroarena and Llina´s 1997). We
included a dendritic high-threshold calcium conductance (Table
A7), but did not explore particular firing behaviors dominated by

A7. Membrane conductance densities for TCR cells (mS/cm2), by level in model structure

Level

gNa(F)

gNa(P)

gK(DR)

gK(C)

gK(A)

gK(M)

gK2

gK(AHP)

gCa(L)

gCa(T)

gAR

0
1
2
3
4

400
100
100
5
5

0.8
0.2
0.2
0.01
0.01

180
33.75
22.5
0
0

0
12
12
20
20

1
6
6
0.2
0.2

0
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

0.5
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0

0
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05

0
0.5
0.5
0.25
0.25

0
0.5
5.0
3.0
0.5

0
0.25
0.50
0.3
0.3

Explanation of levels: level 0 ϭ axon; level 1 ϭ soma; levels 2– 4 ϭ progressively more distal dendrites.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

oblique tips, 180 ␮m; apical trunk (soma to bifurcation at tuft), 975
␮m; tuft bifurcation to tip of tuft, 240 ␮m.
Voltage-dependent conductance kinetics were as for superficial
layer 2/3 pyramids, with the exception that gK(A) inactivation time
constant, ␶h(V), was multiplied by 2.6. Conductance densities are
listed in Table A4. That tufted IB cells have more apical calcium
conductance than do tufted RS cells is consistent with data of Yuste
et al. (1994).
As Fig.A4 shows, the model neuron can generate either single or
multiple bursts in response to sufficiently large depolarizing current
pulses. Sodium spikes attenuate with passage into the distal apical
trunk, and slow calcium-dependent depolarizations can develop there.
Figure A4 should be compared with Fig. 11 of Larkum et al. (2001).
As a matter of detail, however, the potential at D2 peaks early and
then declines with superimposed notches corresponding to somatic
fast spikes, whereas in Larkum et al. (2001), the dendritic potential
has a slowly rising envelope. Part of this difference in behavior may
result from the fact that the somatic spikes in the model (unlike the
experimental illustration) start to decline in amplitude after the first
two.

2220

TRAUB ET AL.

it. For a review of some of the behavior of these cells see Steriade
et al. (1997; chap. 5).
We used kinetics for the low-threshold calcium current (T current)
derived from Destexhe et al. (1998), and for the h current derived
from Huguenard and McCormick (1992).
The compartmental architecture and firing properties of the model
TCR neuron are illustrated in Fig. A7. The model has 10 dendrites
[compared with 11 in the study of Destexhe et al. (1998) in rat
ventrobasal thalamus]. The length of one dendrite was 135 ␮m.
[Compare firing properties with Turner et al. 1997, Fig. 9, as well as,
for an in vivo study, Descheˆnes et al. (1984) and, for guinea pig in
vitro, Jahnsen and Llina´s (1984a,b).] The ability of model TCR and
nRT neurons to participate in realistic-looking spindles is illustrated in
the main text (Fig. 4).

Nucleus reticularis thalami (nRT) neuron
This cell model has the topological compartmental structure of
an interneuron, but with longer dendrites than for FS and LTS cells
(soma to distal dendritic tip ϭ 600 ␮). There are four primary
TABLE

dendrites. Interneuron rate functions are used for the kinetics of
gNa, gK(DR), and low-threshold gCa(T). The rate functions for the
latter are as in Destexhe et al. (1996; their p. 17)—motivated by the
different kinetics, including slower inactivation— of this conductance in nRT cells compared with TCR cells (Huguenard and
Prince 1992). We used
m ϱ ϭ 1.0/͕1.0 ϩ exp͓͑ϪV Ϫ 52.0͒/7.40͔͖
h ϱ ϭ 1.0/͕1.0 ϩ exp͓͑V ϩ 80.0͒/5.0͔͖

␶ m ϭ 1.0 ϩ 0.33/͕exp͓͑V ϩ 27.0͒/10.0͔ ϩ exp͓͑ϪV Ϫ 102.0͒/15.0͔͖
␶ h ϭ 28.3 ϩ 0.33/͕exp͓͑V ϩ 48.0͒/4.0͔ ϩ exp͓͑ϪV Ϫ 407.0͒/50.0͔͖

The model nRT neuron does not exhibit intrinsic subthreshold 40 Hz
(Pinault and Descheˆnes 1992), but does exhibit low-threshold bursts
(with accelerando/decelerando pattern; Contreras et al. 1992, 1993),
as well as tonic firing at depolarized membrane potentials (Fig. A8).
It is interesting that the tonic firing in the model nRT neuron, in a state
when T channels are relatively inactivated, resembles the tonic firing
of Type II nRT cells (i.e., nonbursting nRT cells; cf. Fig. 2B of
Contreras et al. 1992). Conductance densities are shown in Table A8.

A8. Membrane conductance densities for nRT cells (mS/cm2), by level in model structure

Level

gNa(F)

gNa(P)

gK(DR)

gK(C)

gK(A)

gK(M)

gK2

gK(AHP)

gCa(L)

gCa(T)

gAR

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

400
60
60
60
10
10
10
10
10
10

4.0
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

400
60
60
60
10
10
10
10
10
10

0
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

1
5
5
5
1
1
1
1
1
1

0
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

0
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

0
0.05
0.05
0.05
2
2
2
2
2
2

0
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025

Explanation of levels: level 0 ϭ axon; level 1 ϭ soma; levels 2–9 ϭ progressively more distal dendrites.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. A7. Thalamocortical relay (TCR) cell. A: soma was held hyperpolarized with a Ϫ0.9 nA current. At ^, the current was switched to Ϫ0.3 nA
(a), 0.1 nA (b), 0.3 nA (c), 0.5 nA (d; note different time scale). In a, b,
and c, a low-threshold spike is evoked, with increasing numbers of
superimposed fast action potentials. In d, a low-threshold spike occurs,
followed by adapting tonic firing. Compare with Turner et al. (1997). B:
compartmental structure. There are 10 stubby dendrites, each with 3 levels
of branching.

FIG. A8. Firing behavior of nucleus reticularis thalami (nRT) model cell.
Cell was held with a Ϫ0.2 nA hyperpolarizing current, then stepped with the
currents indicated. Broad low threshold spikes occur with superimposed fast
action potentials. With 0.5 nA, there is a prolonged tail of tonic firing. Note the
accelerando/decelerando pattern with steps to 0.0 and 0.3 nA. Compare
Contreras et al. (1992).

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL
APPENDIX

A

REFERENCES

J Neurophysiol • VOL

Kammermeier PJ and Jones SW. High-voltage-activated calcium currents in
neurons acutely isolated from the ventrobasal nucleus of the rat thalamus.
J Neurophysiol 77: 465– 475, 1997.
Kang Y and Kayano F. Electrophysiological and morphological characteristics of layer VI pyramidal cells in the cat motor cortex. J Neurophysiol 72:
578 –591, 1994.
Kasper EM, Larkman AU, Lu¨bke J, and Blakemore C. Pyramidal neurons
in layer 5 of the rat visual cortex. I. Correlation among cell morphology,
intrinsic electrophysiological properties, and axon targets. J Comp Neurol
339: 459 – 474, 1994.
Kawaguchi Y. Physiological subgroups of nonpyramidal cells with specific
morphological characteristics in layer II/III of rat frontal cortex. J Neurosci
15: 2638 –2655, 1995.
Kay AR, Sugimori M, and Llina´s R. Kinetic and stochastic properties of a
persistent sodium current in mature guinea pig cerebellar Purkinje cells.
J Neurophysiol 80: 1167–1179, 1998.
Kay AR and Wong RKS. Calcium current activation kinetics in pyramidal
neurons of the CA1 region of the mature guinea pig hippocampus. J Physiol
392: 603– 616, 1987.
Kim HG and Connors BW. Apical dendrites of the neocortex: correlation
between sodium- and calcium-dependent spiking and pyramidal cell morphology. J Neurosci 13: 5301–5311, 1993.
Larkum ME, Kaiser KMM, and Sakmann B. Calcium electrogenesis in
distal apical dendrites of layer 5 pyramidal cells at a critical frequency of
back-propagating action potentials. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 14600 –
14604, 1999.
Larkum ME and Zhu JJ. Signaling of layer 1 and whisker-evoked Ca2ϩ and
Naϩ action potentials in distal and terminal dendrites of rat neocortical
pyramidal neurons in vitro and in vivo. J Neurosci 22: 6691–7005, 2002.
Larkum ME, Zhu JJ, and Sakmann B. A new cellular mechanism for
coupling inputs arriving at different cortical layers. Nature 398: 338 –341,
1999.
Larkum ME, Zhu JJ, and Sakmann B. Dendritic mechanisms underlying the
coupling of the dendritic with the axonal action potential initiation zone of
adult rat layer 5 pyramidal neurons. J Physiol 533: 447– 466, 2001.
Llina´s RR, Grace AA, and Yarom Y. In vitro neurons in mammalian cortical
layer 4 exhibit intrinsic oscillatory activity in the 10- to 50-Hz range. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 88: 897–901, 1991.
Mainen ZE, Joerges J, Huguenard JR, and Sejnowski TJ. A model of spike
initiation in neocortical pyramidal neurons. Neuron 15: 1427–1439, 1995.
Major G. The Physiology, Morphology and Modeling of Cortical Pyramidal
Neurons (PhD thesis). Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press, 1992.
Markram H., Helm PJ, and Sakmann B. Dendritic calcium transients
evoked by single back-propagating action potentials in rat neocortical
pyramidal neurons. J Physiol 485: 1–20, 1995.
Martina M and Jonas P. Functional differences in Naϩ channel gating
between fast-spiking interneurones and principal neurons of rat hippocampus. J Physiol 505: 593– 603, 1997.
Martina M, Schultz JH, Ehmke H, Monyer H, and Jonas P. Functional and
molecular differences between voltage-gated Kϩ channels of fast-spiking
interneurons and pyramidal neurons of rat hippocampus. J Neurosci 18:
8111– 8125, 1998.
Mason A and Larkman A. Correlations between morphology and electrophysiology of pyramidal neurons in slices of rat visual cortex. II. Electrophysiology. J Neurosci 10: 1415–1428, 1990.
McCormick DA, Connors BW, Lighthall JW, and Prince DA. Comparative
electrophysiology of pyramidal and sparsely spiny stellate neurons of the
neocortex. J Neurophysiol 54: 782– 806, 1985.
McCormick DA and Huguenard JR. A model of the electrophysiological
properties of thalamocortical relay neurons. J Neurophysiol 68: 1384 –1400,
1992.
McCormick DA and Pape H-C. Properties of a hyperpolarization-activated
cation current and its role in rhythmic oscillation in thalamic relay neurons.
J Physiol 431: 291–318, 1990.
Mittman T, Linton SM, Schwindt P, and Crill W. Evidence for persistent
Naϩ current in apical dendrites of rat neocortical neurons from imaging of
Naϩ-sensitive dye. J Neurophysiol 78: 1188 –1192, 1997.
Pare´ D and Lang EJ. Calcium electrogenesis in neocortical pyramidal
neurons in vivo. Eur J Neurosci 10: 3164 –3170, 1998.
Pedroarena C and Llina´s R. Dendritic calcium conductances generate highfrequency oscillation in thalamocortical neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
94: 724 –728, 1997.
Pinault D and Descheˆnes M. Voltage-dependent 40-Hz oscillations in rat
reticular thalamic neurons in vivo. Neuroscience 51: 245–258, 1992.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

Amitai Y, Friedman A, Connors BW, and Gutnick MJ. Regenerative
activity in apical dendrites of pyramidal cells in neocortex. Cereb Cortex 3:
26 –38, 1993.
Bal T and McCormick DA. Mechanisms of oscillatory activity in guinea-pig
nucleus reticularis thalami in vitro: a mammalian pacemaker. J Physiol 468:
669 – 691, 1993.
Beierlein M, Gibson JR, and Connors BW. Two dynamically distinct
inhibitory networks in layer 4 of the neocortex. J Neurophysiol 90: 2987–
3000, 2003.
Birtoli B and Ulrich D. Firing mode-dependent synaptic plasticity in rat
neocortical pyramidal neurons. J Neurosci 24: 4935– 4940, 2004.
Brumberg JC, Nowak LG, and McCormick DA. Ionic mechanisms underlying repetitive high-frequency burst firing in supragranular cortical neurons. J Neurosci 20: 4829 – 4843, 2000.
Colbert CM and Pan E. Ion channel properties underlying axonal action
potential initiation in pyramidal neurons. Nat Neurosci 5: 533–538, 2002.
Connors BW and Gutnick MJ. Intrinsic firing patterns of diverse neocortical
neurons. Trends Neurosci 13: 365–366, 1990.
Contreras D, Curro´ Dossi R, and Steriade M. Bursting and tonic discharges
in two classes of reticular thalamic neurons. J Neurophysiol 68: 973–977,
1992.
Contreras D, Curro´ Dossi R, and Steriade M. Electrophysiological properties of cat reticular thalamic neurons in vivo. J Physiol 470: 273–294, 1993.
Cunningham MO, Whittington MA, Bibbig A, Roopun A, LeBeau FEN,
Vogt A, Monyer H, Buhl EH, and Traub RD. A role for fast rhythmic
bursting neurons in cortical gamma oscillations in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 101: 7152–7157, 2004.
Descheˆnes M, Paradis M, Roy JP, and Steriade M. Electrophysiology of
neurons of lateral thalamic nuclei in cat: resting properties and burst
discharges. J Neurophysiol 51: 1196 –1219, 1984.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Steriade M, Sejnowski TJ, and Huguenard JR.
In vivo, in vitro, and computational analysis of dendritic calcium currents in
thalamic reticular neurons. J Neurosci 16: 169 –185, 1996.
Destexhe A, Neubig M, Ulrich D, and Huguenard J. Dendritic lowthreshold calcium currents in thalamic relay cells. J Neurosci 18: 3574 –
3588, 1998.
Dodge FA Jr and Cooley JW. Action potential of the motoneuron. IBM J Res
Dev 17: 219 –229, 1973.
Emri Z, Antal K, To´th TI, Cope DW, and Crunelli V. Backpropagation of
the ␦ oscillation and the retinal excitatory postsynaptic potential in a
multi-compartment model of thalamocortical neurons. Neuroscience 98:
111–127, 2000.
French CR, Sah P, Buckett KJ, and Gage PW. A voltage-dependent
persistent sodium current in mammalian hippocampal neurons. J Gen
Physiol 95: 1139 –1157, 1990.
Goldberg JH, Lacefield CO, and Yuste R. Global dendritic calcium spikes
in mouse layer 5 low threshold spiking (LTS) interneurones: implications
for control of pyramidal cell bursting. J Physiol 558: 465– 478, 2004.
Gray CM and McCormick DA. Chattering cells: superficial pyramidal
neurons contributing to the generation of synchronous oscillations in the
visual cortex. Science 274: 109 –113, 1996.
Hirsch JA. Synaptic integration in layer IV of the ferret striate cortex.
J Physiol 483: 183–199, 1995.
Hughes SW, Lo¨rincz M, Cope DW, Blethyn KL, Ke´kesi KA, Parri HR,
Juha´sz G, and Crunelli V. Synchronized oscillations at ␣ and ␪ frequencies
in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Neuron 42: 1–20, 2004.
Huguenard JR, Coulter DA, and Prince DA. A fast transient potassium
current in thalamic relay neurons: kinetics of activation and inactivation.
J Neurophysiol 66: 1304 –1315, 1991.
Huguenard JR and McCormick DA. Simulation of the currents involved in
rhythmic oscillations in thalamic relay neurons. J Neurophysiol 68: 1373–
1383, 1992.
Huguenard JR and Prince DA. A novel T-type current underlies prolonged
Ca2ϩ-dependent burst firing in GABAergic neurons of rat thalamic reticular
nucleus. J Neurosci 12: 3804 –3817, 1992.
Jahnsen H and Llina´s R. Electrophysiological properties of guinea-pig
thalamic neurons: an in vitro study. J Physiol 349: 205–226, 1984a.
Jahnsen H and Llina´s R. Ionic basis for the electroresponsiveness and
oscillatory properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurons in vitro. J Physiol 349:
227–247, 1984b.

2221

2222

TRAUB ET AL.

APPENDIX B

Synaptic and gap junctional mechanisms and connectivity
The network model consisted of the following cell subpopulations:
1,000 superficial RS pyramids, 50 superficial FRB pyramids, 90
superficial basket cells, 90 superficial axoaxonic cells (Freund et al.
1983), 90 superficial LTS interneurons (Thomson and Deuchars
1997), 240 spiny stellates, 800 layer 5 tufted IB pyramids, 200 layer
5 tufted RS pyramids, 500 nontufted deep RS pyramids, 100 deep
basket cells, 100 deep axoaxonic cells, 100 deep LTS interneurons,
100 TCR cells, and 100 nRT cells: 3,560 neurons in all. Of the model
cortical neurons 19% are GABAergic, compared with the 21% figure
given by Gabbott and Somogyi (1986) and 15% by Beaulieu (1993).
O’Kusky and Colonnier (1982) reported approximately equal numbers of neurons in layers 1–3 as compared with layers 5– 6, in monkey
area 17; our model has somewhat more total neurons in layers 5– 6
(1,800 neurons) than in layers 2–3 (1,320 neurons), although we used
a far smaller proportion of layer 4 cells than are found in the highly
specialized visual cortex (O’Kusky and Colonnier 1982).
Herein we describe the chemical synaptic and gap junctional
communications within and between these subpopulations.

Reversal potentials for synaptic conductances

Synaptic connectivity patterns
Here we list, for any particular cell type, the numbers of neurons of
the cell type that provide synaptic input to neurons of that and of any
other cell type. Synaptic connections are formed randomly, subject to
the constraint that the number of synaptic inputs that a cell of type
“post” receives from a cell of type “pre” is equal to the value given in
the text below. From the number of inputs n that a cell of type post
receives from a cell of type pre, one can calculate the connection
probability P, for the pre-to-post connections: the total number of
connections from the pre population to the post population ϭ n ϫ #
post cells. The probability of a connection is then this total divided by
the number of possible connections, which is # pre cells ϫ # post
cells. Thus P ϭ n/# pre cells. [Actually, this provides only an estimate
of P, because the above calculation assumes that the connections
made onto a neuron are all from different cells, whereas the connection algorithm used in the simulation program does not follow this
constraint; instead, it just picks presynaptic cells randomly, one by
one, without checking to see whether the same cell has been picked
more than once.]
A superficial RS pyramidal neuron receives synaptic input from 50 superficial RS pyramidal
neurons (i.e., a 1/20 connection probability); a superficial FRB pyramidal neuron receives input from 50 superficial RS pyramidal neurons; a superficial basket cell, a superficial axoaxonic cell, and a
superficial LTS interneuron each receive input from 90 superficial RS
pyramidal neurons (about 1/11 connection probability); a spiny stellate cell receives input from 3 superficial RS pyramidal neurons [a
small number according to Thomson and Bannister (2003) and Gottlieb and Keller (1997)]; a tufted IB pyramid and a tufted RS pyramid
each receive input from 60 superficial RS pyramids (about 1/16
connection probability); deep basket, axoaxonic, and LTS interneurons each receive input from 30 superficial RS pyramids; each
nontufted RS pyramid receives input from 3 superficial RS pyramids.
TCR and nRT cells are not contacted by superficial RS pyramids.
Thomson and Deuchars (1997) found a connection probability of 1/4
to 1/21 for layer 2/3 3 layer 2/3 pyramidal cell connections, and
between 1/4 and 1/11 for layer 2/3 3 layer 5 pyramidal cell connections; the connection probability, within-layer, for pyramidal 3
interneuron connections, was between 1/3 and 1/10.
INPUTS FROM SUPERFICIAL RS PYRAMIDS.

INPUTS FROM SUPERFICIAL FRB PYRAMIDS. A superficial RS pyramidal neuron receives synaptic input from 5 superficial FRB pyramidal neurons; a superficial FRB pyramidal neuron receives input from
5 superficial FRB pyramidal neurons; a superficial basket cell, a
superficial axoaxonic cell, and a superficial LTS interneuron each
receive input from 5 superficial FRB pyramidal neurons; a spiny
stellate cell receives input from one superficial FRB pyramidal neuron
[a small number according to Thomson and Bannister (2003)]; a
tufted IB pyramid and a tufted RS pyramid each receive input from 3
superficial FRB pyramids; deep basket, axoaxonic, and LTS interneurons each receive input from 3 superficial FRB pyramids; each
nontufted RS pyramid receives input from one superficial FRB pyramid. TCR and nRT cells are not contacted by superficial FRB
pyramids.

A superficial RS pyramid or FRB pyramid receives input from 20 superficial baskets (about
1/5 connection probability); superficial basket, axoaxonic, and LTS

INPUTS FROM SUPERFICIAL BASKET CELLS.

The reversal potential for AMPA and NMDA receptor-mediated
conductances was 0 mV. We did not consider kainate receptorJ Neurophysiol • VOL

mediated conductances separately because their time course—at least
in some cortical neurons—is similar to the time course of AMPA
conductances (Ali 2003), so that AMPA and kainate conductances
could be lumped together. The GABAA reversal potential depended
on cell type: it was Ϫ75 mV for GABAergic cells (Sanchez-Vives et
al. 1997), spiny stellates, and deep pyramids; it was Ϫ81 mV for
superficial pyramids and TCR neurons [the latter value being close to
the Ϫ83 mV reported by Sanchez-Vives and McCormick (1997)].

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

Porter JT, Johnson CK, and Agmon A. Diverse types of interneurons
generate thalamus-evoked feedforward inhibition in the mouse barrel cortex.
J Neurosci 21: 2699 –2710, 2001.
Rhodes PA and Llina´s RR. Apical tuft input efficacy in layer 5 pyramidal
cells from rat visual cortex. J Physiol 536: 167–187, 2001.
Schiller J, Schiller Y, Stuart G, and Sakmann B. Calcium action potentials
restricted to distal apical dendrites of rat neocortical pyramidal neurons.
J Physiol 505: 605– 616, 1997.
Schubert D, Ko¨tter R, Zilles K, Luhmann HJ, and Staiger JF. Cell
type-specific circuits of cortical layer IV spiny neurons. J Neurosci 23:
2961–2970, 2003.
Steriade M, Jones EG, and McCormick DA. Thalamus. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 1997.
Steriade M, Timofeev I, Du¨rmu¨ller N, and Grenier F. Dynamic properties
of corticothalamic neurons and local cortical interneurons generating fast
rhythmic (30 – 40 Hz) spike bursts. J Neurophysiol 79: 483– 490, 1998.
Stuart G, Schiller J, and Sakmann B. Action potential initiation and
propagation in rat neocortical pyramidal neurons. J Physiol 505: 617– 632,
1997.
Tarczy-Hornoch K, Martin KA, Jack JJ, and Stratford KJ. Synaptic
interactions between smooth and spiny neurons in layer 4 of cat visual
cortex in vitro. J Physiol 508: 351–363, 1998.
Traub RD, Buhl EH, Gloveli T, and Whittington MA. Fast rhythmic
bursting can be induced in layer 2/3 cortical neurons by enhancing Naϩ
conductance or by blocking BK channels. J Neurophysiol 89: 909 –921,
2003.
Turner JP, Anderson CM, Williams SR, and Crunelli V. Morphology and
membrane properties of neurons in the cat ventrobasal thalamus in vitro.
J Physiol 505: 707–726, 1997.
van Brederode JF and Snyder GL. A comparison of the electrophysiological
properties of morphologically identified cells in layers 5B and 6 of the rat
neocortex. Neuroscience 50: 315–357, 1992.
Williams SR and Stuart GJ. Mechanisms and consequences of action
potential burst firing in rat neocortical pyramidal neurons. J Physiol 521:
467– 482, 1999.
Williams SR and Stuart GJ. Action potential backpropagation and somatodendritic distribution of ion channels in thalamocortical neurons. J Neurosci
20: 1307–1317, 2000.
Yuste R, Gutnick MJ, Saar D, Delaney KR, and Tank DW. Ca2ϩ accumulations in dendrites of neocortical pyramidal neurons: an apical band and
evidence for two functional compartments. Neuron 13: 23– 43, 1994.
Zhang ZW and Descheˆnes M. Intracortical axonal projections of lamina VI
cells of the primary somatosensory cortex in the rat: a single-cell labeling
study. J Neurosci 17: 6356 – 6379, 1997.

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

interneurons each receive input from 20 superficial baskets; a spiny
stellate cell receives input from 20 superficial baskets. [According to
Tama´s et al. (1997), almost all boutons of layer 2/3 basket cells, in
visual cortex, lie in layer 2/3. These authors estimated that, in vitro,
23– 40 basket cells converge on a layer 2/3 pyramidal cell.] Thomson
and Deuchars (1997) found, for local within-layer interneuron 3
pyramidal cell connections, a probability of 1/2.5 to 1/5.
A superficial RS
pyramid or FRB pyramid receives input from 20 superficial axoaxonic
cells; a spiny stellate cell receives input from 5 superficial axoaxonic
cells; tufted IB and RS pyramids, and nontufted RS pyramids, each
receive input from 5 superficial axoaxonic cells (Somogyi et al. 1982).
Note that axoaxonic cells do not contact interneurons (Buhl et al.
1994), and that axoaxonic cells do contact at least some spiny stellate
cells (Saint Marie and Peters 1985).

INPUTS FROM SUPERFICIAL AXOAXONIC CELLS.

INPUTS FROM LAYER 4 SPINY STELLATE CELLS. Each spiny stellate
cell receives input from 30 spiny stellate cells, giving a connection
probability of 1/8. [Fleidervish et al. (1998) estimated a connection
probability of 3.75% for spiny stellate/spiny stellate connections, in
mouse barrel cortex, whereas Lu¨bke et al. (2003) estimated that—in
juvenile rat barrel cortex in vivo—a single layer 4 spiny stellate
receives input from about 200 other layer 4 spiny stellates. Beierlein
et al. (2003) reported a connection probability of 6% between layer 4
RS cells in rat barrel cortex in vitro.] All other cortical glutamatergic
cells, and all cortical GABAergic cells, each receive input from 20
spiny stellates. [Note that the axons of layer 4 glutamatergic cells
extend through all cortical layers, within a given column (Lu¨bke et al.
2000). In addition, Lu¨bke et al. (2003) estimate that—again, in
juvenile rat barrel cortex in vivo—a single layer 2/3 pyramid receives
input from 300 to 400 layer 4 spiny stellates. The discrepancies
between model parameters and in vivo data result in part from the
relatively small total number of spiny stellates in the model.]

Superficial pyramids (RS,
FRB) each receive input from 2 tufted IB pyramids. Each tufted IB
pyramid receives input from 50 tufted IB pyramids. [Thus the connection probability between tufted IB pyramids was 6.25%; the
connection probability for pairs of tufted layer 5 pyramids (whether
IB or RS was not stated), within 50 ␮m of each other, was 10% in the
study of Markram et al. (1997).] Each tufted RS pyramid, each spiny
stellate cell, and each nontufted RS pyramid receives input from 20
tufted IB pyramids. All cortical GABAergic cells receive input from
20 tufted IB pyramids.

nontufted RS pyramids, TCR cells, nRT cells (Gentet and Ulrich
2004).
The following cells each receive
input from 20 deep basket cells: spiny stellates, tufted pyramids (RS,
IB), deep nontufted RS pyramids, deep interneurons (basket, axoaxonic, LTS). [Note that White et al. (1994) found, with ultrastructural
methods, that layer 5 IB and RS cells had similar perisomatic
synaptology.]

INPUTS FROM DEEP BASKET CELLS.

INPUTS FROM DEEP AXOAXONIC CELLS. All cortical glutamatergic
cells receive inputs from 5 deep axoaxonic cells (Somogyi et al.
1982).
INPUTS FROM DEEP LTS INTERNEURONS. Each superficial pyramid
(RS and FRB) and superficial GABAergic cell (basket, axoaxonic,
LTS interneuron) receives input from 10 deep LTS interneurons.
Spiny stellates, tufted pyramids (RS, IB), nontufted RS pyramids, and
deep GABAergic cells (basket, axoaxonic, LTS interneuron) receive
input from 20 deep LTS interneurons.

Each nRT
cell receives input from 40 TCR cells. The following cells each
receive input from 10 TCR cells: superficial pyramids (RS, FRB),
superficial basket and axoaxonic cells, tufted pyramids (RS, IB),
nontufted RS pyramids, deep axoaxonic cells. [Note that there is
direct evidence that lateral geniculate neurons synapse onto spiny
layer 6 neurons (Bannister et al. 2002). In addition, it is the case
that in rat barrel cortex, the TCR 3 axoaxonic (chandelier)
pathway is actually rather weak (Zhu et al. 2004).] Each of the
following cells receives input from 20 TCR cells: spiny stellates,
deep baskets. LTS interneurons do not receive input from TCR
cells (Gibson et al. 1999). [Note that, in vivo in mouse barrel
cortex, a spiny stellate cell was estimated to have 43 thalamocortical synapses (Segev et al. 1995). In addition, the model has more
spiny stellate inputs—to a given spiny stellate cell—than it has
TCR inputs (Stratford et al. 1996).]

INPUTS FROM THALAMOCORTICAL RELAY (TCR) CELLS.

TCR cells each
receive input from 30 nRT cells; nRT cells each receive input from 10
nRT cells. Nucleus reticularis synaptic interconnections are axodendritic; we did not include dendrodendritic synaptic interactions
(Pinault et al. 1997). Liu and Jones (1999) did not observe such
synapses in rat nucleus reticularis.

INPUTS FROM NUCLEUS RETICULARIS (NRT) CELLS.

INPUTS FROM TUFTED IB PYRAMIDS.

Superficial pyramids (RS,
FRB) each receive input from 2 tufted RS pyramids. Each tufted RS
pyramid receives input from 10 tufted RS pyramids. Spiny stellates,
tufted IB pyramids, and nontufted RS pyramids each receive input
from 20 tufted RS pyramids. All cortical GABAergic cells receive
input from 20 tufted RS pyramids.

INPUTS FROM TUFTED RS PYRAMIDS.

INPUTS FROM NONTUFTED RS PYRAMIDS. The following cells each
receive 10 inputs from nontufted RS pyramids: superficial pyramids
(RS, FRB); tufted pyramids (RS, IB); spiny stellates (according to
Tarczy-Hornoch et al. 1999); all cortical GABAergic neurons. The
following cells each receive 20 inputs from nontufted RS pyramids:

J Neurophysiol • VOL

Regions of neurons synaptically contacted by the various
presynaptic neurons
The postsynaptic compartments where synaptic connections may
form are shown in Figs. B1 to B10. Each synaptic connection, from
cell 1 (of whatever type) to cell 2 (of whatever type), involves exactly
one postsynaptic compartment. Connections made by axoaxonic interneurons must go to principal cell initial segments. For other sorts of
connections (e.g., for connections between subpopulation A and
subpopulation B) additional postsynaptic compartments can be forced
into the network, if necessary, by increasing the density of the
appropriate connections from A-cells to B-cells, and by making
corresponding reductions in the appropriate unitary synaptic conductances.
[Comparisons with data: we did not include tufted pyramid connections to the tufts of other tufted pyramids, although such connections seem to exist (Feldmeyer and Sakmann 2000). We placed
connections from superficial pyramids to layer 5 cells on the apical
shaft, as in Reyes and Sakmann (1999), although we did not include
the connections onto oblique layer 5 cell dendrites that were described
in that paper.]

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

INPUTS FROM SUPERFICIAL LTS INTERNEURONS. Each of the following sorts of cell receives input from 20 LTS interneurons: all
cortical glutamatergic cells and all cortical GABAergic cells. Salin
and Prince (1996b) provide functional evidence for cross-laminar
projections of at least some interneurons, probably including dendritecontacting interneurons: IPSCs evoked by stimulation at a distance
from the soma (e.g., in layer 1) were often slower than IPSCs evoked
by near-soma stimulation. Kim et al. (1995) provide evidence that
layer 2/3 interneurons (not necessarily LTS interneurons) contact the
dendrites of layer 5 pyramidal cells.

2223

2224

TRAUB ET AL.
●

Kinetics of unitary synaptic conductances, baseline
conductance scaling constants, and rescaling in
particular simulations
First, we shall consider the general form of unitary synaptic
conductances. Following that, we shall list the values of the scaling
conductance constants.
AMPA conductances have the time course: c ϫ t ϫ eϪt/␶( AMPA),
where c is the conductance scaling constant, t is time in ms after
arrival of a presynaptic spike at the terminal, and ␶( AMPA) is a
parameter. The program actually constructs c as a product of 2 terms;
we shall explain how this is done, so that people looking into the
actual code will be able to make sense of it. First, the program
constructs a table of “baseline” conductance scaling constants. Later,
some or all of the baseline constants are multiplied by an additional
factor. This device makes it easier to “rescale” groups of scaling
constants together: for example, one might want to reduce all GABAA
conductances by a fixed factor, or scale all the thalamocortical
conductances together. It will therefore be necessary to list all the
baseline conductance scaling constants, along with at least some of the
usual additional scaling factors. Note also, that the AMPA conductance is maximum when t ϭ ␶( AMPA), and therefore the peak AMPA
conductance takes a value of c ϫ ␶( AMPA)/e.
␶(AMPA) takes on the following values:
● 0.8 ms for pyramidal cell 3 FS cell, and spiny stellate 3 FS cell
connections.
● 1.0 ms for pyramidal cell 3 LTS cell, and TCR cell 3 FS cell
connections. [Note that TCR cells do not connect to LTS interneurons (Gibson et al. 1999).]
J Neurophysiol • VOL

FIG. B2. Cells and membrane regions thereof to which superficial basket
cells connect. All connections are to superficial pyramids and interneurons, and
to spiny stellates. Contacted regions are shown in red.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. B1. Cells and membrane regions thereof to which superficial (layer
2/3) pyramidal cells (RS and FRB) deliver synaptic excitation. Contacted
regions are shown in red. Note that superficial pyramids contact the basal and
oblique dendrites of each other, and that there are few connections to spiny
stellates and to layer 6 pyramids. There is, however, a projection to the apical
trunks of layer 5 tufted pyramids.

2.0 ms for pyramidal cell 3 pyramidal cell, pyramidal cell 3
spiny stellate, spiny stellate 3 pyramidal cell, spiny stellate 3
spiny stellate; TCR cell 3 pyramidal cell, spiny stellate, and
nRT cell; layer 6 pyramidal cells 3 TCR cells. [Note that, at
least in hippocampus, AMPA conductances have a faster time
course in interneurons than in pyramidal cells (Geiger et al.
1997), and we have followed that principle here.]
NMDA conductances have the time course: c ϫ g(V, [Mg2ϩ]) ϫ
S(t); here, c is a conductance scaling constant, as above; g is a function
of membrane potential V, and [Mg2ϩ]o, taking values between 0 and
1, and corresponding to the voltage and magnesium dependence of the
NMDA conductance (Jahr and Stevens 1990) (without, however,
taking into account the kinetics of this dependency; the dependency is
assumed to be instantaneous); and S(t) is the time-dependent portion
of the ligand-gated conductance. This general scheme is the same as
was used in an earlier publication (Traub et al. 1994). The form of the
function g, for various values of [Mg2ϩ]o, is shown in Fig. B11. S(t)
rises linearly with time, from 0 to 1, over the time interval 0 to 5 ms;
S(t) then decays exponentially with time constant ␶NMDA. In a few
simulations, we set g ϵ 1; that is, we removed the voltage and
magnesium dependence of the NMDA conductance.
␶NMDA takes on the following values as defaults:
● 150 ms for TCR 3 nRT connections.
● 130 ms for pyramidal 3 pyramidal (Flint et al. 1997), pyramidal 3 spiny stellate, spiny stellate 3 pyramidal, spiny stellate 3
spiny stellate (with some exceptions), TCR 3 pyramidal,
TCR 3 spiny stellate, layer 6 pyramids 3 TCR connections.
● 100 ms for pyramidal and spiny stellates 3 FS and LTS interneurons; and TCR cells 3 FS interneurons. [At least in hippocampus, NMDA conductances are briefer in interneurons than
in pyramidal cells (Perouansky and Yaari 1993).]

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL
●

2225

␶GABA(slow) is 10 ms at nRT 3 TCR connections, and 44.5 ms at
nRT 3 nRT connections (Huntsman and Huguenard 2000).

Values of “baseline” synaptic conductance scaling
factors (nS)
Conductances for most of the possible synaptic connections are not
known experimentally. We generally chose initial values in the range
0.25 to 3.0 nS, and then made adjustments after observing firing
patterns in initial simulations. It is also the case that synaptic conductances vary under particular experimental conditions, and possibly in
different behavioral states, under the influence of neuromodulators.
For example, connections between pyramidal cells can be quite
powerful in vitro in physiological bathing media, but population
EPSPs during kainate-induced gamma oscillations tend to be small in
pyramidal cells (Cunningham et al. 2004a). Synaptic conductances are
also time-varying and heterogeneous over different connections, but
we used time-invariant and nonheterogeneous values (for the most
part).

For AMPA
●

FIG. B3. Cells and membrane regions to which superficial and deep
axoaxonic (chandelier) interneurons connect. These interneurons contact
the axon initial segment of all cortical principal (glutamatergic) cell
types (i.e., pyramidal cells and spiny stellates), but do not contact interneurons. Contact regions are shown in red. Connection probabilities for
superficial and deep axoaxonic interneurons are different (see APPENDIX B
text).

GABAA conductances have the time course c ϫ eϪt/␶(GABA) for all
inhibitory connections except those made by nRT neurons. These
latter have 2 decay time constants, so that the time course is
c1 ϫ eϪt/␶(GABA-fast) ϩ c2 ϫ eϪt/␶(GABA-slow). ␶GABA takes on the
following values:
● 6 ms for FS 3 pyramidal cell or spiny stellate connections.
● 3 ms for basket cell 3 cortical interneuron connections (note that
axoaxonic cells do not contact interneurons) [in fact, in the
dentate gyrus, GABA conductances in interneurons can relax
with a time constant as short as 1.8 ms (Bartos et al. 2001)].
● 20 ms for LTS interneuron 3 all cortical cells. [Here, we are
assuming that dendritic IPSCs have a longer time course than do
perisomatic IPSCs, as is the case in hippocampus (Miles et al.
1996).]
Note that Salin and Prince (1996) estimated a value of ␶GABA of 8
ms for principal cells in somatosensory cortex slices, at a holding
potential of 0 mV; but they also found ␶GABA to be voltage-dependent,
increasing with depolarization. Xiang et al. (2002) found equivalent
decay time constants for LTS and FS cell-induced IPSCs in layer 5
visual cortex pyramids, but these data may be difficult to interpret,
based as they are on voltage-clamp experiments in very large neurons.
We used a slower time constant for dendritic IPSC decay than for
perisomatic IPSC decay, following observations in piriform cortex
pyramidal cells (Kapur et al. 1997).
● ␶GABA(fast) is 3.3 ms at nRT 3 TCR connections, and 9 ms at
nRT 3 nRT connections.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

FIG. B4. Cells and membrane regions thereof to which superficial and deep
LTS interneurons connect (shown in red). These interneurons contact dendritic
regions of cortical principal cells and interneurons [although LTS/LTS connections have been reported to be rare, at least in layer 4 (Beierlein et al.
2003)].

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

●

Connections made by superficial (layer 2/3) pyramids (RS and
FRB): to other superficial pyramids (RS and FRB), 0.25 nS; to
superficial FS cells, 3 nS; to superficial LTS cells, 2 nS; to spiny
stellates, 0.1 nS; to tufted pyramids (layer 5, RS and IB), 0.1 nS;
to deep interneurons (FS and LTS), 1.0 nS; to layer 6 nontufted
pyramids, 0.5 nS.
Connections made by layer 4 spiny stellates: to superficial pyramids, 1.0 nS; to superficial interneurons, 1.0 nS; to other spiny
stellates, 1.0 nS; to deep pyramids and interneurons, 1.0 nS.

2226

TRAUB ET AL.
●

Connections made by TCR cells: to superficial pyramids, 0.5 nS;
to superficial FS cells, 0.1 nS; to spiny stellates, 1.0 nS; to layer
5 tufted pyramids (IB and RS), 1.5 nS; to deep basket cells, 1.5
nS; to deep axoaxonic cells, 1.0 nS; to layer 6 nontufted pyramids, 1.0 nS; to nRT cells, 0.75 nS (a large value for these “tight”
cells; Gentet and Ulrich 2003). Note that the major pathway for
feedforward inhibition from the thalamus is by deep FS cells,
which in the present model includes the population of layer 4 FS
cells. [Note that the unitary TCR/spiny stellate conductance has
been estimated to be 0.5 nS peak (Segev et al. 1995), smaller than
we used.]

For NMDA
●

●

●
FIG. B5. Cells and membrane regions thereof to which layer 4 spiny
stellate cells connect. These cells contact all types of cortical neurons, including each other. Connections to layer 2/3 pyramids are on basal dendrites
(Feldmeyer et al. 2002).

●

●

●

Many of these conductances are then “rescaled” (see following
text).
Connections made by layer 5 tufted IB cells: to superficial
pyramids, 0.5 nS; to superficial interneurons, 1.0 nS; to spiny
stellates, 0.5 nS; to other tufted cells (IB and RS), 2.0 nS; to deep
FS cells, 3 nS; to deep LTS cells, 2.0 nS; to layer 6 nontufted
pyramids, 2 nS. [Markram et al. (1997) estimated a mean conductance of 3 nS for connections between nearby tufted layer 5
pyramids in 14- to 16-day- old rat somatosensory cortex. Notably, EPSP size at these mutual interconnections was quite variable, 0.15 to 5.5 mV, and estimated quantal peak conductance
was 1.5 to 5.5 nS; however, we used a constant value of conductance for pyramid 3 pyramid connections.]
Connections made by layer 5 tufted RS cells: to superficial
pyramids, 0.5 nS; to superficial interneurons, 1.0 nS; to spiny
stellates, 0.5 nS; to layer 5 tufted pyramids (RS and IB), 1.0 nS;
to deep FS cells, 3.0 nS; to deep LTS cells, 2.0 nS; to layer 6
nontufted pyramids, 1.0 nS.
Connections made by layer 6 nontufted RS pyramids: to superficial pyramids, 0.5 nS; to superficial FS cells, 1.0 nS; to spiny
stellates, 0.5 nS; to tufted layer 5 pyramids (IB and RS), 1.0 nS;
to deep FS cells, 3.0 nS; to deep LTS cells, 2.0 nS; to other layer
6 nontufted pyramids, 1.0 nS; to TCR cells, 0.75 nS; to nRT cells,
0.5 nS. [Note, however, that nRT model cells have a higher input
resistance (71 M⍀, measured with all active conductances
blocked) than do model TCR cells (59 M⍀). Nevertheless, physiological measurements indicate a greater disparity than in the
model for nRT cortically evoked EPSPs, as compared with TCR
cortically evoked EPSPs, the nRT EPSPs being significantly
larger (Golshani et al. 2001).]
J Neurophysiol • VOL

FIG. B6. Cells and membrane regions thereof to which deep basket cells
connect. These cells contact perisomatic regions of deep pyramidal neurons
and spiny stellates, as well as deep interneurons.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

●

Connections made by superficial (layer 2/3) RS pyramids: to
superficial pyramids (RS and FRB), 0.025 nS; to superficial
interneurons, 0.15 nS; to spiny stellates, 0.01 nS; to deep tufted
pyramids, 0.01 nS; to deep FS cells, 0.1 nS; to deep LTS
interneurons, 0.15 nS; to deep nontufted RS pyramids, 0.05 nS.
(However, note the significant rescaling of most NMDA conductances below.)
Connections made by superficial (layer 2/3) FRB pyramids: to
superficial pyramids (RS and FRB), 0.025 nS; to superficial
interneurons, 0.1 nS; to spiny stellates, 0.01 nS; to tufted deep
pyramids, 0.01 nS; to deep interneurons, 0.1 nS; to deep nontufted pyramids, 0.05 nS.
Connections made by spiny stellates: to superficial pyramids (RS
and FRB), 0.1 nS; to superficial interneurons, 0.15 nS; to other
spiny stellates, 0.1 nS; to deep pyramids (tufted and nontufted),
0.1 nS; to deep interneurons, 0.15 nS.
Connections made by layer 5 tufted IB pyramids: to superficial
pyramids (RS and FRB), 0.05 nS; to superficial interneurons,

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL
●

●

●

●

●

2227

Connections made by superficial LTS interneurons: to superficial
pyramids, 0.01 nS; to superficial FS cells, 0.01 nS; to superficial
LTS cells, 0.05 nS; to spiny stellates, 0.01 nS; to tufted pyramids,
0.02 nS; to deep FS cells, 0.01 nS; to deep LTS cells, 0.05 nS; to
nontufted deep pyramids, 0.01 nS.
Connections made by deep basket cells: to spiny stellates, 1.5 nS;
to tufted pyramids, 0.7 nS; to deep FS cells, 0.2 nS; to deep LTS
cells, 0.7 nS; to deep nontufted pyramids, 0.7 nS.
Connections made by deep axoaxonic cells: to superficial pyramids, 1.0 nS; to spiny stellates, 1.5 nS, to deep pyramids (tufted
and nontufted), 1.0 nS.
Connections made by deep LTS cells: to superficial pyramids,
0.01 nS; to superficial FS cells, 0.01 nS; to superficial LTS cells,
0.05 nS; to spiny stellates, 0.01 nS; to tufted IB pyramids, 0.05
nS; to tufted RS pyramids, 0.02 nS; to deep FS cells, 0.01 nS; to
deep LTS cells, 0.05 nS; to deep nontufted pyramids, 0.01 nS.
Connections made by nRT cells: to TCR cells, 0.7 to 2.1 nS
(uniformly, randomly distributed); to nRT cells, 0.3 nS. The
heterogeneity in nRT 3 TCR connections follows Cox et al.
(1997).

“Rescaling” of baseline synaptic conductances

FIG. B7. Cells and membrane regions thereof to which deep (layer 5) tufted
pyramidal cells (IB and RS) connect. These cells contact dendrites of each
other and of layer 6 nontufted pyramids, dendrites of spiny stellates and deep
and superficial interneurons, a few superficial pyramids.

●

●

●

0.15 nS; to spiny stellates, 0.05 nS; to deep pyramids (tufted and
nontufted), 0.2 nS; to deep interneurons, 0.15 nS.
Connections made by layer 5 tufted RS pyramids: to superficial
pyramids (RS and FRB), 0.05 nS; to superficial interneurons,
0.15 nS; to spiny stellates, 0.05 nS; to deep pyramids (tufted and
nontufted), 0.1 nS; to deep interneurons, 0.1 nS.
Connections made by layer 6 nontufted pyramids: to superficial
pyramids (RS and FRB), 0.05 nS; to superficial baskets, 0.1 nS;
to spiny stellates, 0.05 nS; to tufted and nontufted pyramids, 0.1
nS; to deep interneurons, 0.1 nS; to TCR cells, 0.075 nS; to nRT
cells, 0.05 nS.
Connections made by TCR cells: to superficial pyramids (RS and
FRB), 0.05 nS; to superficial FS cells, 0.01 nS; to spiny stellates,
0.1 nS; to layer 5 tufted pyramids (RS and IB), 0.15 nS; to deep
FS cells, 0.1 nS; to layer 6 nontufted pyramids, 0.1 nS; to nRT
cells, 0.15 nS.

For GABAA
●

●

Connections made by superficial basket cells: to superficial (layer
2/3) pyramids, 1.2 nS; to other superficial basket cells, 0.2 nS; to
superficial axoaxonic cells, 0.2 nS; to superficial LTS interneurons, 0.5 nS; to spiny stellates, 0.1 nS. [It is possible that the
IPSC conductance in LTS interneurons should have been smaller
than in basket cells, rather than the reverse (Bacci et al. 2003).
Salin and Prince (1996a) observed spontaneous IPSC amplitudes
of about 0.5 nS in principal somatosensory cortex neurons, a
smaller value than we used for unitary connections.]
Connections made by superficial axoaxonic cells: to superficial(layer 2/3) pyramids, 1.2 nS; to spiny stellates, 0.1 nS; to deep
pyramids (tufted and nontufted), 1.0 nS.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

FIG. B8. Cells and membrane regions thereof to which layer 6 nontufted
pyramids connect. These cells contact similar portions of cortical neurons as do
layer 5 tufted pyramids, and portions of the apical dendrites of layer 2/3
pyramids. In addition, layer 6 nontufted pyramids contact the proximal dendrites of nRT neurons and the distal dendrites of TCR neurons.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

As mentioned above, the program first constructs tables of the
baseline synaptic conductance constants (as just listed), but then—
depending on the simulation—the program multiplies subsets of the
conductance factors by “rescaling” factors. Thus for example, the
thalamic portion of the network can be disconnected from the cortex
by setting all AMPA and NMDA conductances in thalamocortical
connections to 0. Picrotoxin is simulated by multiplicative scaling of

2228

TRAUB ET AL.

all GABAA conductances, either in cortex alone, or in cortex plus
thalamus. AMPA conductances at spiny stellate 3 spiny stellate
connections are set to “low” or “high” values, by multiplying the
baseline conductance by 0.25 or 2.0, respectively. In most simulations, all other AMPA conductances are twice the baseline values.
Likewise, in most simulations, NMDA conductances to cortical interneurons are multiplied by 0.2, as are NMDA conductances on nRT
cells and TCR cells; cortical principal cell (pyramids and spiny
stellates) have NMDA conductances multiplied by 2.5. Other rescalings are performed as described in the main text.

FIG. B10. nRT neurons contact dendritic regions of each other, and also the
somata and proximal dendrites of TCR neurons (Liu et al. 1995).

the coupling site mainly dendrodendritic (Fukuda and Kosaka 2003;
Tama´s et al. 2000), and coupling conductances estimated in the range
of about 0.6 to 1.6 nS [with Fukuda and Kosaka (2003) estimating
even higher values of 2.1–5.3 nS]. In the model, we used gap
junctions between superficial baskets [average 4.44 per neuron, vs. an
average of 5.3 per parvalbumin positive interneuron in Fukuda and
Kosaka (2003)], between superficial LTS cells (average 4.44 per
neuron), between deep baskets (average 5 per neuron), and between
deep LTS cells (average 5 per neuron)— but not between axoaxonic
cells. Interneuron gap junctions could be placed on any of 8 compartments in the dendrites, and all had a conductance of 1.0 nS. These gap
junctions were included in the model because of evidence that they
stabilize and enhance coherence of gamma oscillations (Buhl et al.
2003; Hormuzdi et al. 2001; Traub et al. 2001).

Combining synaptic conductances
For a given compartment on a given neuron, and a particular type
of synaptic input (e.g., AMPA), synaptic inputs from different presynaptic neurons simply add together linearly. There is a possibility in
the program to allow for saturation of NMDA receptors, to avoid
having the program generate huge postsynaptic conductances.
Synaptic plasticity is not included in this model. In particular, we
did not include, in this first version, the many known effects of
short-term depression and facilitation (Feldmeyer et al. 2002; Thomson 1997; Thomson and West 2003). Such effects could well be
important during epileptogenesis, given the high firing rates.)

Patterns of electrical coupling
CORTICAL INTERNEURONS. Cortical FS interneurons are densely
electrically coupled with each other, as are LTS interneurons (Galarreta and Hestrin 1999; Gibson et al. 1999; Venance et al. 2000), with

J Neurophysiol • VOL

2ϩ
FIG. B11. Fractional opening [“Open” ϭ g(V, [Mg ]o)] of model NMDA
channels as a function of transmembrane potential (abscissa, V) and of
[Mg2ϩ]o. Curves are drawn for 0.25-mM steps in [Mg2ϩ]o, from 0.25 to 2.0
mM. Function used is from Eq. 4A and Table 1 of Jahr and Stevens (1990); see
also Fig. 3 of Traub et al. (1994). Default [Mg2ϩ]o in the model is 1.5 mM.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

FIG. B9. Cells and membrane regions thereof to which TCR neurons
connect. These cells contact primarily the proximal dendrites of nRT neurons
and the dendrites of layer 4 spiny stellate neurons. In addition, they contact
cortical FS neurons [although there is evidence in barrel cortex that thalamic
afferents do not contact axoaxonic interneurons (Beierlein et al. 2003)], and
they contact distal dendrites of cortical pyramids, including the tufts of layer
5 tufted pyramids.

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL

NRT CELLS. These GABAergic cells are also electrically coupled
(Landisman et al. 2001). We placed an average of 5 gap junctions per
cell in the dendrites of nRT cells, each with a conductance of 1 nS.
THALAMOCORTICAL RELAY CELLS. TCR cells are dye coupled and
show electrophysiological evidence of being electrically coupled
(Hughes et al. 2002 2004). We made the guess that the requisite gap
junctions were dendritic because slow, putatively Ca2ϩ-mediated
spikes appear as small slow “spikelets” in TCR cells (Fig. 7 of Hughes
et al. 2004). In the model, at this stage, TCR gap junctions were
usually closed.
All gap junctions in the model had conductances that were voltageindependent and nonrectifying.
AXON CONDUCTION DELAYS. Within the cortical column, and
within the nRT/TCR pool, we ignored axon conduction delays. A
conduction delay of 1 ms was imposed on thalamocortical connections (Agmon and Connors 1992), and of 5 ms on corticothalamic
connections (Gentet and Ulrich 2004). [Note that, in vivo, axonal
conduction from cortex to thalamus is much slower than in the reverse
direction (Steriade et al. 1990).]
AXON REFRACTORINESS. Axons were not permitted to send spikes
to their respective presynaptic terminals at intervals of Ͻ1.5 ms.

The axons of
glutamatergic cells generated random action potentials, by independent Poisson processes, usually with mean intervals of 10 s (superficial pyramids) and 1 s (all other glutamatergic neurons, including
TCR cells) (see also Cunningham et al. 2004a; Traub et al. 2003).

RANDOM “ECTOPIC” AXONAL ACTION POTENTIALS.

We estimated extracellular potentials at depths of 1 and 2 mm, using landmarks for cortical
layers in rat auditory cortex (HL), based on a rat brain atlas (Paxinos
and Watson 1986). In Plate 23 of that atlas, the approximate thicknesses of the cortical layers were as follows: layer 1: 300 ␮; layer 2/3:
1,100 ␮; layer 4: 300 ␮; layer 5: 400 ␮; layer 6: 800 ␮. Transmembrane ionic currents were used to estimate fields, using only currents
in basal dendrites, soma, and apical dendrites (not oblique dendrites),
and only from pyramidal cells: superficial ones and tufted and nontufted pyramids. Any one type of pyramid was assumed to lie at a
fixed depth, and homologous compartments were also assumed to lie
ESTIMATION OF EXTRACELLULAR FIELDS.

J Neurophysiol • VOL

at the same depth. Thus a defined depth was assigned to each relevant
compartment of each type of pyramidal cell. All of the transmembrane
currents were then added up, weighted by the inverse distance from
the site of “recording.” (Thus the resistivity of the extracellular space
is assumed constant.) We did not use a specific value for the extracellular resistivity, so that the present fields are without units. When
fields at 2 distinct depths are shown, they are plotted on the same
scale, for consistency.
APPENDIX

B

REFERENCES

Agmon A and Connors BW. Correlation between intrinsic firing patterns and
thalamocortical synaptic responses of neurons in mouse barrel cortex.
J Neurosci 12: 319 –329, 1992.
Ali AB. Involvement of postsynaptic kainate receptors during synaptic transmission between unitary connections in rat neocortex. Eur J Neurosci 17:
2344 –2350, 2003.
Bacci A, Rudolph U, Huguenard JR, and Prince DA. Major differences in
inhibitory synaptic transmission onto two neocortical interneuron subclasses. J Neurosci 23: 9664 –9674 2003.
Bannister NJ, Nelson JC, and Jack JJ. Excitatory inputs to spiny cells in
layers 4 and 6 of striate cortex. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 357:
1793–1808, 2002.
Bartos M, Vida I, Frotscher F, Geiger JRP, and Jonas P. Rapid signaling
at inhibitory synapses in a dentate gyrus interneuron network. J Neurosci 21:
2687–2698, 2001.
Beaulieu C. Numerical data on neocortical neurons in adult rat, with special
reference to the GABA population. Brain Res 609: 284 –292, 1993.
Beierlein M, Gibson JR, and Connors BW. Two dynamically distinct
inhibitory networks in layer 4 of the neocortex. J Neurophysiol 90: 2987–
3000, 2003.
Browne SH, Kang J, Akk G, Chiang LW, Schulman H, Huguenard JR,
and Prince DA. Kinetic and pharmacological properties of GABAA receptors in single thalamic neurons and GABAA subunit expression. J Neurophysiol 86: 2312–2322, 2001.
Bruzzone R, Hormuzdi SG, Barbe MT, Herb A, and Monyer H. Pannexins,
a family of gap junction proteins expressed in brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
100: 13644 –13649, 2003.
Buhl DL, Harris KD, Hormuzdi SG, Monyer H, and Buzsa´ki G. Selective
impairment of hippocampal gamma oscillations in connexin-36 knock-out
mouse in vivo. J Neurosci 23: 1013–1018, 2003.
Buhl EH, Han Z-S, Lo¨rinczi Z, Stezhka VV, Karnup SV, and Somogyi P.
Physiological properties of anatomically identified axo-axonic cells in the
rat hippocampus. J Neurophysiol 71: 1289 –1307, 1994.
Cox CL, Huguenard JR, and Prince DA. Nucleus reticularis neurons
mediate diverse inhibitory effects in thalamus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:
8854 – 8859, 1997.
Cunningham MO, Halliday DM, Davies CH, Traub RD, Buhl EH, and
Whittington MA. Coexistence of gamma and high-frequency oscillations in
the medial entorhinal cortex in vitro. J Physiol 559: 347–353, 2004b.
Cunningham MO, Whittington MA, Bibbig A, Roopun A, LeBeau FEN,
Vogt A, Monyer H, Buhl EH, and Traub RD. A role for fast rhythmic
bursting neurons in cortical gamma oscillations in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 101: 7152–7157, 2004a.
Descheˆnes M. Dendritic spikes induced in fast pyramidal tract neurons by
thalamic stimulation. Exp Brain Res 43: 304 –308, 1981.
Eder M, Becker K, Rammes G, Schierloh A, Azad SC, Zieglga¨nsberger W,
and Dodt H-U. Distribution and properties of functional postsynaptic
kainate receptors on neocortical layer V pyramidal neurons. J Neurosci 23:
6660 – 6670, 2003.
Feldmeyer D, Egger V, Lu¨bke J, and Sakmann B. Reliable synaptic
connections between pairs of excitatory layer 4 neurons within a single
“barrel” of developing rat somatosensory cortex. J Physiol 521: 169 –190,
1999.
Feldmeyer D, Lu¨bke J, Silver RA, and Sakmann B. Synaptic connections
between layer 4 spiny neuron-layer 2/3 pyramidal cell pairs in juvenile rat
barrel cortex: physiology and anatomy of interlaminar signaling within a
cortical column. J Physiol 538: 803– 822, 2002.
Feldmeyer D and Sakmann B. Synaptic efficacy and reliability of excitatory
connections between the principal neurons of the input (layer 4) and output
layer (layer 5) of the neocortex. J Physiol 525: 31–39, 2000.
Fleidervish IA, Binshtok AM, and Gutnick MJ. Functionally distinct
NMDA receptors mediate horizontal connectivity within layer 4 of mouse
barrel cortex. Neuron 21: 1055–1065, 1998.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

CORTICAL PYRAMIDAL CELLS AND SPINY STELLATES. Hippocampal
pyramidal cells appear to be electrically coupled, and dye coupled, by
their axons (Schmitz et al. 2001). Experimental and modeling evidence furthermore suggests that this type of coupling is necessary for
persistent gamma oscillations to occur, both in hippocampus in vitro
(Traub et al. 2003) and superficial layers of neocortex in vitro
(Cunningham et al. 2004a). Persistent gamma oscillations in entorhinal cortex are also suppressed by carbenoxolone (Cunningham et al.
2004b). Supporting evidence that principal neocortical cells (including spiny stellates) are electrically coupled comes from the observation of spikelets in pyramidal neurons (Cunningham et al. 2004a,b;
Descheˆnes 1981), the staining through layers 2– 6 for a putative gap
junctional mRNA pannexin2 (Bruzzone et al. 2003; Cunningham et
al. 2004a); and the existence of dye coupling between cortical neurons
(including pyramidal and stellate), in both superficial and deep layers,
with coupling occurring between neurons at similar depths (Gutnick et
al. 1985). We therefore placed axonal gap junctions between layer 2/3
pyramidal cells (average 1.44 RS/RS junctions per RS axon, 0.16
FRB/FRB junctions per FRB axon; 0.75 RS/FRB junctions per FRB
axon); between spiny stellate cells, average 2 gap junctions per axon;
between tufted IB cells, 0.875 per axon; between tufted RS cells, 3.5
per axon; between tufted IB/tufted RS pairs, 0.1 per tufted RS axon;
and between nontufted (layer 6) RS axons, average 2 per axon. These
gap junctions were not always open in each simulation, however.
When gap junctions were open, the conductance was 3.0 nS for layer
2/3 pyramids, 3.0 nS for spiny stellates, and 4.0 nS for deep (layers 5
and 6) pyramids.

2229

2230

TRAUB ET AL.

J Neurophysiol • VOL

Miles R, To´th K, Gulya´s AI, Hajos N, and Freund TF. Differences between
somatic and dendritic inhibition in the hippocampus. Neuron 16: 815– 823,
1996.
O’Kusky J and Colonnier M. A laminar analysis of the number of neurons,
glia, and synapses in the adult cortex (area 17) of adult macaque monkeys.
J Comp Neurol 210: 278 –290, 1982.
Paxinos G and Watson C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates.
Orlando, FL: Academic Press, 1986.
Perouansky M and Yaari Y. Kinetic properties of NMDA receptor-mediated
synaptic currents in rat hippocampal pyramidal cells versus interneurones.
J Physiol 465: 223–244, 1993.
Pinault D, Smith Y, and Descheˆnes M. Dendrodendritic and axoaxonic
synapses in the thalamic reticular nucleus of the adult rat. J Neurosci 17:
3215–3233, 1997.
Reyes A and Sakmann B. Developmental switch in the short-term modification of unitary EPSPs evoked in layer 2/3 and layer 5 pyramidal neurons of
rat neocortex. J Neurosci 19: 3827–3835, 1999.
Saint Marie SL and Peters A. The morphology and synaptic connections of
spiny stellate neurons in monkey visual cortex (area 17): a Golgi-electron
microscopic study. J Comp Neurol 233: 213–235, 1985.
Salin PA and Prince DA. Spontaneous GABAA receptor-mediated inhibitory
currents in adult rat somatosensory cortex. J Neurophysiol 75: 1573–1588,
1996a.
Salin PA and Prince DA. Electrophysiological mapping of GABAA receptormediated inhibition in adult rat somatosensory cortex. J Neurophysiol 75:
1573–1588, 1996b.
Sanchez-Vives MV, Bal T, and McCormick DA. Inhibitory interactions
between perigeniculate GABAergic neurons. J Neurosci 17: 8894 – 8908,
1997.
Sanchez-Vives MV and McCormick DA. Functional properties of perigeniculate inhibition of dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus thalamocortical
neurons in vitro. J Neurosci 17: 8880 – 8893, 1997.
Schmitz D, Schuchmann S, Fisahn A, Draguhn A, Buhl EH, PetraschParwez RE, Dermietzel R, Heinemann U, and Traub RD. Axo-axonal
coupling: a novel mechanism for ultrafast neuronal communication. Neuron
31: 831– 840, 2001.
Segev I, Friedman A, White EL, and Gutnick MJ. Electrical consequences
of spine dimensions in a model of a cortical spiny stellate cell completely
reconstructed from serial thin sections. J Comput Neurosci 2: 117–130,
1995.
Somogyi P, Freund TF, and Cowey A. The axo-axonic interneuron in the
cerebral cortex of the rat, cat and monkey. Neuroscience 7: 2577–2607,
1982.
Steriade M, Jones EG, and Llina´s RR. Thalamic Oscillations and Signaling.
New York: Wiley–Interscience, 1990.
Stratford KJ, Tarczy-Hornoch K, Martin KA, Bannister NJ, and Jack JJ.
Excitatory synaptic inputs to spiny stellate cells in cat visual cortex. Nature
382: 258 –261, 1996.
Tama´s G, Buhl EH, Lo¨rinczi A, and Somogyi P. Proximally targeted
GABAergic synapses and gap junctions precisely synchronize cortical
interneurons. Nat Neurosci 3: 366 –371, 2000.
Tama´s G, Buhl EH, and Somogyi P. Fast IPSPs elicited via multiple synaptic
release sites by different types of GABAergic neuron in the cat visual cortex.
J Physiol 500: 715–738, 1997.
Tama´s G, Somogyi P, and Buhl EH. Differentially interconnected networks
of GABAergic interneurons in the visual cortex of the cat. J Neurosci 18:
4255– 4270, 1998.
Tarczy-Hornoch K, Martin KA, Stratford KJ, and Jack JJ. Intracortical
excitation of spiny neurons in layer 4 of cat striate cortex in vitro. Cereb
Cortex 9: 833– 843, 1999.
Thomson AM. Activity-dependent properties of synaptic transmission at two
classes of connections made by rat neocortical pyramidal axons in vitro.
J Physiol 502: 131–147, 1997.
Thomson AM and Bannister AP. Interlaminar connections in the neocortex.
Cereb Cortex 13: 5–14, 2003.
Thomson AM and Deuchars J. Synaptic interactions in neocortical local
circuits: dual intracellular recordings in vitro. Cereb Cortex 7: 510 –522,
1997.
Thomson AM and West DC. Presynaptic frequency filtering in the gamma
frequency band; dual intracellular recordings in slices of adult rat and cat
neocortex. Cereb Cortex 13: 136 –143, 2003.
Traub RD, Cunningham MO, Gloveli T, LeBeau FEN, Bibbig A, Buhl EH,
and Whittington MA. GABA-enhanced collective behavior in neuronal

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

Flint AC, Maisch US, Weishaupt JH, Kriegstein AR, and Monyer H.
NR2A subunit expression shortens NMDA receptor synaptic currents in
developing neocortex. J Neurosci 17: 2469 –2476, 1997.
Freund TF, Martin KAC, Smith AD, and Somogyi P. Glutamate decarboxylase-immunoreactive terminals of Golgi-impregnated axoaxonic cells and
of presumed basket cells in synaptic contact with pyramidal neurons of the
cat’s visual cortex. J Comp Neurol 221: 263–278, 1983.
Fukuda T and Kosaka T. Ultrastructural study of gap junctions between
dendrites of parvalbumin-containing GABAergic neurons in various neocortical areas of the adult rat. Neuroscience 120: 5–20, 2003.
Gabbott PL and Somogyi P. Quantitative distribution of GABA-immunoreactive neurons in the visual cortex (area 17) of the cat. Exp Brain Res 61:
323–331, 1986.
Galarreta M and Hestrin S. A network of fast-spiking cells in the neocortex
connected by electrical synapses. Nature 402: 72–75, 1999.
Geiger JRP, Lu¨bke J, Roth A, Frotscher M, and Jonas P. Submillisecond
AMPA receptor-mediated signaling at a principal neuron-interneuron synapse. Neuron 18: 1009 –1023, 1997.
Gentet LJ and Ulrich D. Strong, reliable and precise synaptic connections
between thalamic relay cells and neurons of the nucleus reticularis in
juvenile rats. J Physiol 546: 801– 811, 2003.
Gentet LJ and Ulrich D. Electrophysiological characterization of synaptic
connections between layer VI cortical cells and neurons of the nucleus
reticularis thalami in juvenile rats. Eur J Neurosci 19: 625– 633, 2004.
Gibson JR, Beierlein M, and Connors BW. Two networks of electrically
coupled inhibitory neurons in neocortex. Nature 402: 75–79, 1999.
Golshani P, Liu XB, and Jones EG. Differences in quantal amplitude reflect
GluR4-subunit number at corticothalamic synapses on two populations of
thalamic neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98: 4172– 4177, 2001.
Gottlieb JP and Keller A. Intrinsic circuitry and physiological properties of
pyramidal neurons in rat barrel cortex. Exp Brain Res 115: 47– 60, 1997.
Gutnick MJ, Lobel-Yaakov R, and Rimon G. Incidence of neuronal dyecoupling in neocortical slices depends on the plane of section. Neuroscience
15: 659 – 666, 1985.
Gutnick MJ and Prince DA. Dye coupling and possible electrotonic coupling
in the guinea pig neocortical slice. Science 211: 67–70, 1981.
Hormuzdi SG, Pais I, LeBeau FEN, Towers SK, Rozov A, Buhl EH,
Whittington MA, and Monyer H. Impaired electrical signaling disrupts
gamma frequency oscillations in connexin 36-deficient mice. Neuron 31:
487– 495, 2001.
Hughes SW, Blethyn KL, Cope DW, and Crunelli V. Properties and origin
of spikelets in thalamocortical neurons in vitro. Neuroscience 110: 395– 401,
2002.
Huntsman MM and Huguenard JR. Nucleus-specific differences in
GABAA-receptor-mediated inhibition are enhanced during thalamic development. J Neurophysiol 83: 350 –358, 2000.
Jahr CE and Stevens CF. Voltage dependence of NMDA-activated macroscopic conductances predicted by single-channel kinetics. J Neurosci 10:
3178 –3182, 1990.
Kapur A, Pearce RA, Lytton WW, and Haberly LB. GABAA-mediated
IPSCs in piriform cortex have fast and slow components with different
properties and locations on pyramidal cells. J Neurophysiol 78: 2531–2545,
1997.
Kim HG, Beierlein M, and Connors BW. Inhibitory control of excitable
dendrites in neocortex. J Neurophysiol 74: 1810 –1814, 1995.
Landisman CE, Long MA, Beierlein M, Deans MR, Paul DL, and Connors
BW. Electrical synapses in the thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurosci 22:
1002–1009, 2002.
Liu X-B and Jones EG. Predominance of corticothalamic synaptic inputs to
thalamic reticular nucleus neurons in the rat. J Comp Neurol 414: 67–79,
1999.
Liu X-B, Warren RA, and Jones EG. Synaptic distribution of afferents from
reticular nucleus in ventroposterior nucleus of cat thalamus. J Comp Neurol
352: 187–202, 1995.
Lu¨bke J, Egger V, Sakmann B, and Feldmeyer D. Columnar organization of
dendrites and axons of single and synaptically coupled excitatory spiny
neurons in layer 4 of the rat barrel cortex. J Neurosci 20: 5300 –5311, 2000.
Lu¨bke J, Roth A, Feldmeyer D, and Sakmann B. Morphometric analysis of
the columnar innervation domain of neurons connecting layer 4 and layer
2/3 of juvenile rat barrel cortex. Cereb Cortex 13: 1051–1063, 2003.
Markram H, Lu¨bke J, Frotscher M, Roth A, and Sakmann B. Physiology
and anatomy of synaptic connections between thick tufted pyramidal neurons in the developing rat neocortex. J Physiol 500: 409 – 440, 1997.

THALAMOCORTICAL MODEL
axons underlies persistent gamma-frequency oscillations. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 100: 11047–11052, 2003.
Traub RD, Jefferys JGR, and Whittington MA. Enhanced NMDA conductance can account for epileptiform activity induced by low Mg2ϩ in the rat
hippocampal slice. J Physiol 478: 379 –393, 1994.
Traub RD, Kopell N, Bibbig A, Buhl EH, LeBeau FEN, and Whittington
MA. Gap junctions between interneuron dendrites can enhance synchrony of
gamma oscillations in distributed networks. J Neurosci 21: 9478 –9486,
2001.
Venance L, Rozov A, Blatow M, Burnashev N, Feldmeyer D, and Monyer
H. Connexin expression in electrically coupled postnatal rat brain neurons.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97: 10260 –10265, 2000.
White EL, Amitai Y, and Gutnick MJ. A comparison of synapses onto the
somata of intrinsically bursting and regular spiking neurons in layer V of rat
SmI cortex. J Comp Neurol 342: 1–14, 1994.
Xiang Z, Huguenard JR, and Prince DA. Synaptic inhibition of pyramidal
cells evoked by different interneuronal subtypes in layer V of rat visual
cortex. J Neurophysiol 88: 740 –750, 2002.
Zhang SJ, Huguenard JR, and Prince DA. GABAA receptor-mediated ClϪ
currents in rat thalamic reticular and relay neurons. J Neurophysiol 78:
2280 –2286, 1997.
Zhu Y, Stornetta RL, and Zhu JJ. Chandelier cells control excessive cortical
excitation: characteristics of whisker-evoked synaptic responses of layer 2/3
nonpyramidal and pyramidal neurons. J Neurosci 24: 5101–5108, 2004.
Zonta M and Carmignoto G. Calcium oscillations encoding neuron-toastrocyte communication. J Physiol (Paris) 96: 193–198, 2002.

Computer science aspects
Here we describe the computing platform and the organization
of the code. [Further details may be obtained by contacting
roger.traub@downstate.edu.] We assume the reader is familiar
with the basic principles of simulating membrane electrophysiology in compartmental neurons (Koch and Segev 1998; Traub and
Miles 1991).
Simulations were run on a Linux cluster, an IBM e1350, purchased with a combination of National Institutes of Health funds
and funds from the SUNY Downstate equipment matching program. The cluster consists of a management/user node and a
number of compute nodes. Each compute node contains a dualprocessor Intel P4 Xeon 2.4-GHz cpu (central processing unit),
with 512 Kbytes of L2 cache; or, more recently, an e1350 Blade 1,
at 2.8 GHz. The operating system was Redhat Linux version 7.3.
The Linux cluster was used so that the computation could be
broken in pieces, each of which runs on its own cpu; the parallel
computing allowed simulations to be run in times that were not too
unreasonable. Parallel computing on the system was managed by
PBS (portable batch system) software.
Code was written in Fortran, which is highly efficient for parallel
applications. The mpi protocol was used so as to allow the various
cpus to run independently, and yet 1) be able to share data (such as
firing times of all the axons in the network), and 2) to maintain
synchrony among the cpus, even though some cpus are handling more
computational work than others.
The code was organized so that the numerical integration of each
cell type (14 in all) ran on a separate cpu. This organization has a
major disadvantage, in that some cpus are loaded more than other
cpus, and the overall simulation can run only as fast as the most
loaded cpu. On the other hand, the chosen organization makes the
code reasonably intelligible, and—we believe—allows for the
easiest expansion, to include more cell types, and to allow for
extension to multiple columns. In addition, because gap junction
connections are mostly between cells of the same type (e.g.,
superficial LTS interneurons, deep nontufted pyramidal cells),
having all cells of a given type on a single cpu will lessen some of
the between-cpu message passing. Unfortunately, this relative
advantage will be lessened as the number of neurons increases,
J Neurophysiol • VOL

when it happens that not all cells (even of a given type) can be
handled on a single cpu.
To reiterate the cell types, one cpu each is assigned to each cell type
as follows: superficial pyramidal RS, superficial pyramidal FRB,
superficial basket, superficial axoaxonic, superficial LTS interneuron,
layer 4 spiny stellates, tufted layer 5 IB pyramids, tufted layer 5 RS
pyramids, nontufted deep pyramids, deep basket, deep axoaxonic,
deep LTS interneuron, TCR cells, and nRT cells. Each of these cell
types had its own integration program, using a uniform integration
step (dt ϭ 2 ␮s), and an explicit 2nd-order Taylor series integration
method. Each integration subroutine calls a special subroutine that
specifies the voltage and [Mg2ϩ]o dependency of NMDA conductances (see Fig. B11 in APPENDIX B).
To explain in more detail the organization of the main (highest
level) program, we shall list a series of blocks of code that are either
common (run identically on each cpu) or cpu-specific (in which each
cpu executes its own code, code specific to the type of neuron “living”
on that cpu). The structure of the main program, at a coarse-grained
level, is as follows:
1. COMMON. Define the basic network parameters, including these:
the number of neurons of each type; the number of synaptic inputs
each neuron of one type receives from neurons of any other type; the
number of compartments, and their identity, where a synaptic connection from a neuron of type 1 to a neuron of type 2 can be placed
(for all ordered pairs [type 1, type 2]); the compartmental locations of
possible gap junctions, the density of gap junctions, and which types
of cells can couple to which; synaptic conductance scaling factors and
time constants; gap junction conductances, and so forth.
2. COMMON. Define a series of tables that specify all the synaptic
interconnections (i.e., a cell of type 1 contacts compartment x on
another cell of type 2); likewise for gap junction interconnectivity;
specify tonic driving currents, and the noise parameters for ectopic
spikes, and other parameters.
3. COMMON. Allow for special sorts of weightings applied to synaptic conductances of one class or another, for example, to simulate
the effects of NBQX, APV, or picrotoxin, or to disconnect the
thalamus from the cortex; or to examine the effects of some particular
manipulation, such as increasing the extent to which nRT cells inhibit
TCR cells.
4. CPU-SPECIFIC. Update the values of time-dependent synaptic
conductances, using the latest tables of axonal activity. This is done
every 50 time steps. Determine also which axons are to generate new
ectopic spikes.
5. CPU-SPECIFIC. Each cpu calls the integration program appropriate for the cell type “living” on that cpu. The subroutine call passes
parameters that include: how many time steps have been integrated;
the number of neurons of the appropriate type; the present (and to be
calculated at the next time step) values of all the voltages and [Ca2ϩ]i;
tonic driving currents; synaptic conductance values (for AMPA,
NMDA, GABAA); [Mg2ϩ]o; gap junction conductances and connectivity tables. (Synaptic connectivity tables need not be passed to the
subroutine, as the relevant information for the integration routine is
contained in the actual present values of the conductances, which have
been computed in step 4.)
In the very first call of each integration subroutine, that subroutine
calls additional subroutines that establish—for the type of neuron
handled in the integration subroutine—the basic neuronal structural
parameters: compartmental topology, membrane conductance densities (e.g., for fast gNa), electrotonic parameters (RM, Ri, CM), the
scaling constant for coupling [Ca2ϩ]i in each compartment to Ca2ϩdependent conductances in that compartment; and rate functions for
the time-dependent membrane state variables. Each of the 14 cpus
performs numerical integration on its cells in order (cell 1, cell 2, etc.)

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

APPENDIX C

2231

2232

TRAUB ET AL.

6. CPU-SPECIFIC. If the neurons on cpu k are electrically coupled to
neurons on another cpu, say cpu l, then— every 5 time steps— cpu k
must broadcast the membrane voltages at those compartments (for
neurons living on cpu k) at which gap junctions might be located. To
do this, cpu k broadcasts the voltages to all other cpus, so that cpu l
receives the necessary data. For example, the cpu handling superficial
pyramidal RS cells will have to broadcast voltages at some axonal
site(s) to all other cpus, so that the cpu handling superficial pyramidal
FRB cells can be kept informed.
7. CPU-SPECIFIC. Every 50 time steps, each cpu broadcasts (for its
own neurons) the voltages at that distal axon compartment used for
the calculation of synaptic inputs to other neurons.
8. COMMON. Update the tables of distal axonal activity. These
tables are used in step 4.

J Neurophysiol • VOL

Integration method
We used an explicit 2nd-order Taylor series method with fixed time
step (2 ␮s). This is the same method as used in previous studies
(Traub and Miles 1991).
Compilation of the main program—the one with calls to the mpi
parallel computing subroutines—was performed with an Intel Fortran
parallel compiler, using the call mpif77, and linking to the directory
PEPCF90. Nonparallel Fortran subroutines were compiled with the
call ifc. All compilations used the O3 optimization option.

Fast Fourier transforms (FFTs)
FFTs were usually performed on 8,142 (213) data points, representing 814.2 ms of data, most often field potential data. We used an FFT
algorithm found in the Intel Fortran library in directory /usr/local/lib/
libdfftpack.a, with calls to subroutines ZFFTI and ZFFTF.
APPENDIX

C

REFERENCES

Koch C and Segev I. Editors. Methods in Neuronal Modeling. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1998.
Traub RD, Jefferys JGR, and Whittington MA. Fast Oscillations in
Cortical Circuits. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.
Traub RD and Miles R. Neuronal Networks of the Hippocampus. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1991.

93 • APRIL 2005 •

www.jn.org

Downloaded from on February 20, 2015

9. CPU-SPECIFIC. Every 50 time steps, each cpu writes data about
its own neurons, including voltages at selected compartments of
selected neurons; total AMPA, NMDA, and GABAA synaptic input
received by one neuron; an average of all the somatic potentials of the
neurons on the respective cpu; and the estimated contribution
made— by that cpu’s neurons—to the extracellular potential at various levels in the cortex.
Steps 4 through 9 are repeated until the simulation is finished.
Simulating 1.6 s of network activity took about 30 h, about 18.75
h per second of simulation, with the Xeon nodes. A 6-s simulation

took about 127 h (about 21.2 h per second of simulation), with the
Blade nodes.

