5250 • The Journal of Neuroscience, April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263

Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive

Interactions between Core and Matrix Thalamocortical
Projections in Human Sleep Spindle Synchronization
Maxime Bonjean,1,2,5* Tanya Baker,1* Maxim Bazhenov,1,2,4 Sydney Cash,5 Eric Halgren,3 and Terrence Sejnowski1,2
1

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California, 2Division of Biological Sciences and 3Departments of
Radiology, Neurosciences, and Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, California, 4Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of
California, Riverside, California, and 5Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts

Sleep spindles are bursts of 11–15 Hz that occur during non-rapid eye movement sleep. Spindles are highly synchronous across
the scalp in the electroencephalogram (EEG) but have low spatial coherence and exhibit low correlation with the EEG when
simultaneously measured in the magnetoencephalogram (MEG). We developed a computational model to explore the hypothesis
that the spatial coherence spindles in the EEG is a consequence of diffuse matrix projections of the thalamus to layer 1 compared
with the focal projections of the core pathway to layer 4 recorded in the MEG. Increasing the fanout of thalamocortical connectivity
in the matrix pathway while keeping the core pathway fixed led to increased synchrony of the spindle activity in the superficial
cortical layers in the model. In agreement with cortical recordings, the latency for spindles to spread from the core to the
matrix was independent of the thalamocortical fanout but highly dependent on the probability of connections between
cortical areas.

Introduction
Human sleep is associated with a profound modification of consciousness and the emergence of distinct sleep oscillations. In the
early stages of non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, the electroencephalogram (EEG) shows characteristic spindle oscillations. These sleep spindles are a hallmark of nonpathological
stage 2 NREM sleep in mammals and are thought to play an important role in memory consolidation (Sejnowski and Destexhe,
2000). In humans, sleep spindles consist of waxing-and-waning
bursts of field potentials oscillating at 11–15 Hz. These bursts last
0.5–3 s and recur every 5–15 s.
Although compelling evidence from decortication in vivo
(Morison and Basset, 1945; von Krosigk et al., 1993) and spindle
recordings in thalamic slices (Kim et al., 1995) demonstrate that
spindles can be generated by the thalamus without cortical input,
the neocortex is required for the long-range synchronization of
spindles (Contreras et al., 1996a,b, 1997; Destexhe et al., 1998).
Previous studies suggest that corticothalamic feedback projec-

Received Dec. 11, 2011; revised,; accepted Jan. 31, 2012.
Author contributions: M.Bo., T.B., M.Ba., S.C., E.H., and T.S. designed research; M.Bo. and T.B. performed research; M.Bo. and T.B. contributed unpublished reagents/analytic tools; M.Bo., T.B., and M.Ba. analyzed data; M.Bo.,
T.B., M.Ba., and T.S. wrote the paper.
*M.Bo. and T.B. share the first authorship.
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health; NIH–National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering Grant 1R01EB009282-01 (T.S., E.H., M.Ba., and M.Bo.); the Crick-Jacobs Center for Theoretical Neurobiology and the Swartz Foundation (T.B.); the Howard Hughes Medical Institute; The Salk Institute for Biological
Studies (T.S. and M.Bo.); the Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego (T.S. and M. Bo.); and
NIH–NINDS Grant 1R01NS060870-01 (M.Ba.).
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Terrence Sejnowski, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037. E-mail: terry@salk.edu.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6141-11.2012
Copyright © 2012 the authors 0270-6474/12/325250-14$15.00/0

tions to the thalamic reticular nucleus may be primarily responsible for this large-scale coherence (Destexhe et al., 1998).
Human sleep spindles measured by the EEG or MEG during
simultaneous recordings exhibit different synchronization properties: the EEG signals from different channels have stronger
cross-pair coherence than the MEG signal (Dehghani et al.,
2010a). Although the relative spatial resolution of these modalities is a possible explanation, a more compelling one is that the
EEG and MEG are generated from different cortical layers. The
evidence comes from current source density (CSD) profiles of
cortical depth electrode recordings of sleep spindles during presurgical exploration of human epileptic patients, consistent with
spatially coherent spindles generated by upper cortical layers and
spatially incoherent spindles generated in middle cortical layers
(Cash et al., 2010).
To confirm this hypothesis, we have investigated the synchronization properties of spindle oscillations in a biologically plausible computational model using two parallel thalamocortical
pathways (core and matrix), which were suggested from studies
in primates, but whose functional role has remained elusive
(Jones 2001, 2002).
This study reconciles the differences in the EEG or MEG
recorded during sleep spindles in humans (Dehghani et al.,
2010a,b, 2011) and in vivo data from anesthetized animals
(Destexhe and Sejnowski, 2003), with a model in which (1)
human sleep spindle oscillations are initiated in the specific projecting thalamocortical core pathway, with focal projections to the middle cortical layers, and that (2) the thalamocortical matrix pathway
underlies the synchronization of the oscillatory activity through the
distributed thalamocortical projections to the upper cortical layers. The activities in thalamocortical core and matrix pathways
dominate the MEG and EEG recordings, respectively.

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

Materials and Methods
Although faithful in capturing the most salient features of spindle oscillations, the computational models developed thus far have been limited
to a unique thalamocortical pathway (Dextexhe et al., 1994, 1998; Bazhenov et al., 1999, 2000). To adequately investigate the propagation and
synchronization of spindle oscillations, we needed to construct a spatially
extensive four-layer model, comprising two main distinct but interconnected thalamocortical pathways based on nonhuman primate observations (Jones, 2002; Zikopoulos and Barbas, 2007): (1) the core pathway,
in which thalamic efferents project to the middle layers of the cortex
(mostly to layers III and IV), and (2) the matrix pathway, which has
thalamic afferents to superficial layers of the cortex (mainly to layer I).
The matrix thalamocortical pathway has more diffuse connections than
the core, the latter being more topologically compact and specific (Jones,
2002; Fig. 1 A). We incorporated these specific connectivity and topographic features into our thalamocortical network model.
The thalamic relay (TC) cells and reticular (RE) neurons were based
on compartment models with Hodgkin-Huxley kinetics (Hodgkin and
Huxley, 1952) used in previous models of sleep oscillations (Bazhenov et
al., 2002). The cortical model included two-compartment excitatory cortical pyramidal (PY) neurons and inhibitory interneurons (IN) with
Hodgkin-Huxley kinetics. The TC and RE cells had low-threshold calcium, fast sodium, and potassium currents. The h-type and potassium A
currents were also included in the TC model cells. The PY and IN cells
had high-threshold calcium, fast, persistent sodium, calcium-dependent
potassium, and potassium M currents in the dendrites; and fast potassium, fast sodium, and persistent sodium currents in the soma. Calcium
pumps that extruded calcium were embedded in all the neurons. The
details of the synaptic kinetics and parameters are included below (see
Modeling details).

J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263 • 5251

and 50 TC neurons and 50 RE neurons in each of the thalamic core and
matrix networks, totaling 700 cells. The widths of the fanout of the
thalamocortical and corticothalamic projections of the matrix were initially focal and equal to those of the core fanout widths. In subsequent
simulations, matrix fanouts were progressively widened while keeping
the corresponding focal connections in the core system constant (Fig.
1 B, C, dashed lines). The maximal values of synaptic connectivity radiuses were determined by the network size; to avoid limitations of “all-toall” connectivity, we limited connectivity by 50 cells in any direction so
that the system would be able to display complex spatiotemporal dynamics (e.g., propagating waves). The total synaptic strength per cell was
scaled accordingly to maintain constant the overall synaptic strength of a
given pathway. The maximal conductances for individual synapses were
the maximal conductance per synaptic release scaled by the number of
synapses. These connectivity properties are summarized in Table 1 and
visualized in Figure 1C. The matrix PY cells were also slightly more
hyperpolarized than the core PY cells (by adjusting the potassium leak
conductance: gKL ϭ 0.0025 mS/cm 2 for core PY cells and 0.003 mS/cm 2
for matrix PY cells; see below, Modeling details). Otherwise, all parameters in the two subsystems were modeled identically.
Most simulations were initiated by a brief external stimulus to five cells
at the edge of the core RE layer modeled by AMPA synapses that had a
maximal conductance of 20 ␮S, but spindle sequences also occurred
spontaneously within the network.
To quantify the synchrony in the system, we used an all-to-all, zerotime-lag cross-correlation of the estimated local field potential (LFP)
during the spindle activity. The measure of the synchrony in the cortical
activity, R, was found by taking the weighted sum of the dot products of
all possible pairs of LFP spindle activity time courses within a cortical
layer. This metric is related to the Schreiber reliability measure (Schreiber
et al., 2003):

Network structure
A schematic of the model thalamocortical network geometry is shown in
Figure 1 B. Our model incorporated two populations of TC cells: matrix
TC neurons forming diffuse projections to matrix PY cortical neurons
with cell bodies in layer V and core TC neurons forming specific, focused
projections to the core PY neurons with cell bodies in layer VI. The apical
dendrites of all PY cells extended to supragranular layers. The termination of matrix TC neurons was in cortical layer I, and those of core TC
neurons were in cortical layer IV. We have not explicitly modeled supragranular cortical neurons; instead, we focused on the contacts made by
matrix thalamic projections to the apical dendrites of the layer V pyramidal cells. This simplification allowed varying easily the main anatomical features of the matrix and core subsystems, such as radius of
thalamocortical projections that was in the focus of our study. Also incorporated were matrix and core RE neurons interconnected with matrix
and core PY and TC neurons, respectively. Each cortical layer included a
layer-specific population of inhibitory IN also receiving thalamocortical
inputs from the respective thalamic areas. The thalamocortical model
was structured as a one-dimensional, six-layer array of cells: (1) a fourlayered cortex of matrix PY, matrix IN, core PY, and core IN cells, and (2)
a two-layered thalamus of TC and RE cells, core, and matrix being equally
divided (Fig. 1C). Core and matrix pathways were connected at the thalamic and cortical levels: (1) along one of the boundaries in the thalamus
(TC and RE layers), and (2) additional “long-range” cortical connections
between the matrix and core pathways were made between their respective PY layers, with a 2% probability ( p ϭ 0.02) corticocortical connection. We also tested the effect of increasing probability up to p ϭ 0.25.
This choice of long-range intracortical probability was essentially determined by the average size of the presynaptic population; probability p ϭ
0.02 corresponded to only few (zero to one) long-range connections, and
probability p ϭ 0.25 corresponded to approximately seven long-range
connections for an average footprint of 30 neurons. Within thalamus,
interactions between core and matrix subsystems were provided through
thalamic reticular neurons. Specifically, we tested the effect of the varying
overlap between reticular neurons of two subsystems on the development and synchronization of spindles.
We performed one-dimensional multilayer simulations consisting of
200 PY neurons and 50 IN neurons per cortical core and matrix networks

Rϭ

2
N͑N Ϫ 1͒

͸͸
N

N

iϭ1 jϭiϩ1

3 3
Si ⅐ Sj
,
3 3
͉Si͉͉Sj͉

(1)

3
where N is the number of LFP points in the population and Si is the time
course of the LFP at location i. Equation 1 captures the similarity of the
LFP spindle activity across a cortical layer.
The LFP was estimated using the axial current between dendritic and
somatic compartments of the cortical cells by an approximate dipole
3
measure. For each subsystem, the LFP at a cortical location i, Si , was
computed by the following equation:
3
Si ϭ

͸

(

j

Iaxial͑ t ͒ Iaxial͑t͒
Ϫ
),
rd
rs j

(2)

where the sum is taken over all excitatory cortical neurons within the
subsystem, Iaxial is the axial current from the dendritic compartment
(source) to the soma compartment (sink) for the model cortical pyramidal cells, and rd and rs are the distances from the dendrite and soma,
respectively, to the location of the LFP measurement (Fig. 2.) This equation approximately reduces to a dipole field, as described by Nunez and
Srinivasan (2006, their Eq. 5.7; modulo a scaling factor), when rd, rs ϾϾ 1.
The distance between the dendrite and the soma (from layer I to layer V
in the matrix and from layer II to layer VI in the core) was assumed to be
2 mm. The distance between cortical cells was estimated to be 100 ␮m
based on the assumption that the synaptic footprint (equal to twice the
fanout plus 1), within which there were ϳ10 cells, was ϳ1 mm. The LFP
signal was bandpass filtered between 5 and 20 Hz to extract spindle
activity.

Modeling details
Intrinsic currents: thalamus. TC and RE cells were modeled as single compartment cells with voltage- and calcium-dependent currents described
by Hodgkin-Huxley kinetics:

cm

dV
ϭ ϪgL ͑V Ϫ EL ͒ Ϫ Iint Ϫ Isyn,
dt

(3)

5252 • J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

Figure 1. Model topology. A, Thalamocortical system with the distribution of matrix cells (red) and core cells (blue) indicated in a frontal section through the middle of a macaque monkey
thalamus. The core thalamic projections are topographically ordered to the middle layers of a single cortical field. The matrix thalamic projections collectively project diffusely to the superficial layers
of dispersed cortical fields [modified from Jones (2001)]. CL, Central lateral nucleus; CM, center median nucleus; HI, lateral habenular nuclei; Hm, medial habenular nuclei; LD, lateral dorsal nucleus;
LGN, lateral geniculate nucleus; LP, lateral posterior nucleus; MD, mediodorsal nucleus; OT, optic tract; P, color-code retinal ganglion cells; Pla, anterior pulvinar nucleus; PP, peripeduncular nucleus;
R, reticular nucleus; s, s laminae; SNr, substantia nigra, pars reticulata; VMb, basal ventral medial nucleus; VPI, ventral posterior inferior nucleus; VPM, ventral posterior medial nucleus. B, Schematic
diagram showing the topology of the thalamocortical computational model, where both the matrix and core systems are depicted. The network connectivity shows the projections between the
thalamus and the cortex (bottom and top, respectively) and between the core and matrix networks (left and right sides, respectively). Excitatory (inhibitory) connections are indicated by solid (open)
circles at the end of a directed path (represented by the arrows). The black dotted lines indicate the projections in the matrix network whose fanout is a variable parameter for the purpose of this
study. The gray dotted lines indicate the corticocortical connections between the matrix and core systems whose connectivity fanout is fixed at 5 but whose probability p of each connection existing
varied from 0 to 50% (default value of 2%). C, Schematic connectivity showing the structure of the core and matrix thalamocortical networks distributed into four interconnected layers. Each cell is
represented by a dot, and the area to which it projects is depicted as a shaded area for a representative cell. Intrathalamic connections were topographic with a divergence (fanout) of four cells. For
these connections only, the cells at the boundary between the thalamic core and matrix networks are neighboring cells (indicated by the gray arrows). Thalamocortical and corticothalamic
projections in the matrix pathway (black dashed lines) were made more expansive than in the core pathway. The fanout values for all connections are summarized in Table 1. Connections between
the core and matrix PY layers (gray dashed lines) are topographic with a fanout of 5 with a low probability (2% for simulations in which this value was not varied).

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263 • 5253

Table 1. Connectivity properties
PY3 TC

PY3 RE

TC3 PY

TC3 IN

PY3 PY

PY3 IN

IN3 PY RE3 RE TC3 RE RE3 TC

Matrix pathway fanout 5, 9, 13, 17, 21, 25 5, 9, 13, 17, 21, 25 5, 14, 23, 32, 41, 50 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11 5
1
5
Core pathway fanout
5
5
5
1
5
1
5
Synaptic current
AMPA
AMPA
AMPA
AMPA
AMPA, NMDA AMPA, NMDA GABAA

4
4
GABAA

4
4
AMPA

4
4
GABAA, GABAB

Top two rows show fanouts used for connections in the matrix and core thalamocortical network model. Multiple numbers within a single cell represent parameter changes with increased fanout. Bottom row shows synaptic currents of
network connectivity.

Table 2. Parameters
Parameter
Cm
Cm;dendrite
Thalamic cells
STC
SRE
GL
EL
EKL
gK
gNa
Figure 2. Local field potential. Schematic of the contribution of pyramidal neuron j to the
local field potential calculated at location i. Arrows indicate the flow of current through ionic
channels, the axial current (Iaxial) between the dendritic (cylindrical) and somatic (spherical)
compartments, and the resulting dipole current in the extracellular space (dashed lines.) The
distances from the dendritic and somatic compartments to the location of the LFP calculation
point i are rd and rs, respectively.

where Cm ϭ 1 ␮F/cm 2 is the membrane capacitance, gL is the leakage
conductance ( gL ϭ 0.01 mS/cm 2 for TC cells and gL ϭ 0.05 mS/cm 2 for
RE cells), and EL is the reversal potential (EL ϭ Ϫ70 mV for TC cells and
EL ϭ Ϫ77 mV for RE cells). I int is the sum of active intrinsic currents
(Ij int), and I syn is the sum of synaptic currents (Ij syn). The area of a TC cell
was STC ϭ 2.9 ϫ 10 Ϫ4 cm 2, and SRE ϭ 1.43 ϫ 10 Ϫ4 cm 2 for an RE cell.
Both TC and RE cells included a fast sodium current, INa; a fast potassium
current, IK (Traub and Miles, 1991); a low-threshold Ca 2ϩ current, IT
[for RE cells (Huguenard and Prince, 1991); for TC cells (Huguenard and
McCormick, 1992)]; and a potassium leak current, IKL, where IKL ϭ
gKL(V Ϫ EKL), with EKL ϭ Ϫ95 mV. TC cells also included a
hyperpolarization-activated cation current, Ih (McCormick and Pape,
1990; Destexhe et al., 1996). A potassium A-current is also included in the
TC cell compartment. The expressions for voltage- and Ca 2ϩ-dependent
transition rates for all currents are given by Bazhenov et al. (1998). The
maximal conductances were gK ϭ 10 mS/cm 2, gNa ϭ 90 mS/cm 2, gT ϭ
2.2 mS/cm 2, gh ϭ 0.017 mS/cm 2, gCa ϭ 2.7 mS/cm 2, and gKL ϭ 0.0142
mS/cm 2 for TC cells and gK ϭ 10 mS/cm 2, gNa ϭ 100 mS/cm 2, gT ϭ 2.3
mS/cm 2, gCa ϭ 2.3 mS/cm 2, and gKL ϭ 0.005 mS/cm 2 for RE cells. See
Table 2 for a list of parameters.
Low-threshold Ca 2ϩ current, IT, and hyperpolarization-activated cation current, Ih play particularly important roles in spindles (Destexhe et
al., 1996; Bazhenov et al., 2002). The model used in this study for computing Ih follows a single-variable kinetic scheme proposed by Destexhe
et al. (1996), modified after a version introduced previously by Destexhe
et al. (1993). The present model assumes that the voltage dependence and
conductance is influenced by Ca 2ϩ to a regulating factor, P, which itself
binds to the open form of the channel and blocks its transition to the
closed form. The dependence of the amplitude of Ih with the intracellular
Ca 2ϩ concentration is captured by the parameter k. All parameters used
in the computation of Ih were taken from previously published papers
(Destexhe et al., 1996; Bazhenov et al., 2002) and were kept constant
throughout the simulations. Therefore, the influence of Ih on spindle
oscillations in our model was, in all aspects, comparable to previous
observations, both in computational models and in in vitro experiments

gT
gh
gCa
gKL
Cortical cells
Ssoma
␳
EL
EKL
gNa
gK
gNa(P)
gL
gKL
gHVA
gK͓Ca͔
gK,m

Value
1 ␮F/cm 2
1 ␮F/cm 2
2.9 ϫ 10 Ϫ4 cm 2
1.43 ϫ 10 Ϫ4 cm 2
0.01 mS/cm 2 (TC)
0.05 mS/cm 2 (RE)
Ϫ70 mV (TC)
Ϫ77 mv (RE)
Ϫ95 mV
10 mS/cm 2 (TC;RE)
90 mS/cm 2 (TC)
100 mS/cm 2 (RE)
2.2 mS/cm 2 (TC)
2.3 mS/cm 2 (RE)
0.017 mS/cm 2 (TC)
2.7 mS/cm 2 (TC)
2.3 mS/cm 2 (RE)
0.0142 mS/cm 2 (TC)
0.005 mS/cm 2 (RE)
1.0 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 cm 2
165 (PY)
50 (IN)
Ϫ68 mV (PY)
Ϫ70 mV (IN)
Ϫ95 mV
3000 mS/cm 2 (PY)
2500 mS/cm 2 (IN)
200 mS/cm 2
15 mS/cm 2
3.5 mS/cm 2 (dendrites)
0.06 mS/cm 2
0 – 003 mS/cm 2
0.01 mS/cm 2
0.3 mS/cm 2
0.01– 0.02 mS/cm 2

(Bal and McCormick, 1996; Luthi and McCormick, 1998). In vitro characterization of spindles revealed a slowly decaying afterdepolarization,
which is strongly pronounced in thalamocortical cells.
Intrinsic currents: cortex. Each PY and IN cortical neuron was modeled
by two compartments coupled by a somato-dendritic resistance of r ϭ 10
M⍀. The ionic currents followed Hodgkin-Huxley kinetics (Mainen and
Sejnowski, 1996) with the addition of a persistent sodium current, INa(p),
in the PY cells to increase bursting propensity. The firing pattern depends
on the coupling conductance between the axosomatic and dendritic
compartments ( g ϭ 1/R) and the parameter ␳, which is the ratio of the
surface area of the dendritic compartment to the somatic compartment (Mainen and Sejnowksi, 1996). The area of the soma was Ssoma
ϭ 1.0 ϫ 10 Ϫ6 cm 2 for the axosomatic compartment and Sdend ϭ
␳Ssoma for the dendritic compartment. For the cortical PY cells, ␳ ϭ
165 to match intrinsic bursting responses observed in the majority of
pyramidal cells in cortical slabs, and ␳ ϭ 50 for IN to obtain fast
spiking firing patterns.

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

5254 • J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263

The membrane potentials of PY and IN cells were governed by the
following equations:

dV D
ϭ ϪgL ͑VD Ϫ EL ͒ Ϫ g͑VD Ϫ VS ͒ Ϫ IDint ϪIsyn
dt
,
g͑VS Ϫ VD ͒ ϭ Ϫ Iint
S

cm

(4)

where Cm is the membrane capacitance, gL is the leakage conductance of
the dendritic compartment, EL is the reversal potential (EL ϭ Ϫ70 mV for
IN and Ϫ68 mV for PY cells), VD and VS are the membrane potentials of
the dendritic and axosomatic compartments, IDint and ISint are the sums
of active intrinsic currents in dendritic and axosomatic compartments,
Isyn is a sum of synaptic currents, and g is the conductance between
dendritic and axosomatic compartments. To increase simulation speed,
the axosomatic compartment had no capacitance, as already described in
a previous study (Bazhenov et al., 2002). The capacitance of the dendritic
compartment was Cm ϭ 0.075 ␮F/cm 2.
Both IN and PY cells included fast Na ϩ channels, INa, of a high density
in the axosomatic compartment and of a low density in the dendritic
compartment. A fast delayed rectifier potassium K ϩ current, IK, was
present in the axosomatic compartment. A slow voltage-dependent noninactivating K ϩ current, IKm; a slow Ca 2ϩ-dependent K ϩ current, IKCa;
a high-threshold Ca 2ϩ current, IHVA; and a potassium leak current, IKL,
where IKL ϭ gKL(V ϫ EKL), EKL ϭ Ϫ95 mV, were included in the dendritic compartment. A persistent sodium current, INa(p), was included in
the axosomatic and dendritic compartments of the PY cells (Alzheimer et
al., 1993; Kay et al., 1998). The voltage- and Ca 2ϩ-dependent transition
rates for all currents followed kinetics given by Timofeev et al. (2000).
The maximal conductances were gNa ϭ 3000 mS/cm 2 (2500 mS/cm 2 for
IN), gK ϭ 200 mS/cm 2, and gNa(p) ϭ 15 mS/cm 2 for axosomatic compartments and gL ϭ 0.033 mS/cm 2 (0.06 mS/cm 2 for PY cells), gKL ϭ
0 – 0.0025 mS/cm 2 (0.0025 for core PY cells and 0.003 for matrix PY
cells), gHVA ϭ 0.01 mS/cm 2, gNa ϭ 0.8 mS/cm 2, gKCa ϭ 0.3 mS/cm 2, gKm ϭ
0.01 mS/cm 2 (0.02 mS/cm 2 for PY cells), and gNa(p) ϭ 3.5 mS/cm 2 for
dendritic compartments.
Synaptic currents. All synaptic currents were calculated according to
the following:

I syn ϭ gsyn ͓O͔͑V Ϫ Esyn͒,

(5)

where gsyn is the maximal conductance, Esyn is the reversal potential, and
[O](t) is the fraction of open channels. For AMPA and NMDA receptors,
Esyn ϭ 0 mV; for GABAA receptors, Esyn ϭ Ϫ70 mV in the RE and PY cells
and Ϫ80 mV for the TC cells (Ulrich and Huguenard, 1997); and for the
GABAB receptors, Esyn ϭ Ϫ95 mV.
The maximal conductance was multiplied by a depression variable,
E Յ 1, representing the amount of available “synaptic resources.” E was
nonunitary for the GABAA intercortical connections and the thalamocortical AMPA connections to describe short-term depression for these
connections (Bazhenov et al., 2002.) A simple phenomenological model
was used: E ϭ 1 Ϫ (1 Ϫ Ei(1 Ϫ U ))e Ϫ (t Ϫ t i)/ ␶, where U is the fraction of
resources used per action potential, ␶ ϭ 700 ms is the time constant of
recovery of the synaptic resources, Ei is the value of E immediately before
the ith event, and (t Ϫ ti) is the time after the ith event. For IN GABAA
synaptic conductance, U ϭ 0.07, and for TC thalamocortical AMPA
synaptic conductance, U ϭ 0.073.
The GABAA, NMDA, and AMPA synaptic currents were modeled by
first-order activation schemes (Destexhe et al., 1994; Golomb and Amitai, 1997). For the NMDA receptors, the dependence on postsynaptic
voltage was 1/[1 ϩ exp(Ϫ(Vpost Ϫ Vth)/␴)], where Vth ϭ Ϫ25 mV and
␴ ϭ 12.5 mV (Traub et al., 1991; Destexhe et al., 1994; Golomb and
Amitai, 1997). A higher-order reaction scheme that took into account the
G-protein-activated K ϩ channels modeled the GABAB receptors (Bazhenov et al., 2002). The equations for all synaptic currents were given by
Bazhenov et al. (1998) and Timofeev et al. (2000). The maximal conductances per synaptic release were gAMPA(PY-PY) ϭ 150 ␮S, gNMDA(PY-PY) ϭ
10 ␮S, gAMPA(PY-IN) ϭ 50 ␮S, gNMDA(PY-IN) ϭ 8 ␮S, gAMPA(PY-TC) ϭ 25
␮S, gAMPA(PY-RE) ϭ 50 ␮S, gGABAA(IN-PY) ϭ 50 ␮S, gAMPA(TC-PY) ϭ 100
␮S, gAMPA(TC-RE) ϭ 4.00 ␮S, gGABAA(RE-TC) ϭ 30 ␮S, gGABAB(RE-TC) ϭ 80
␮S, and gGABAA(RE-RE) ϭ 175 ␮S.

The maximal conductances for individual synapses were the maximal
conductance per synaptic release scaled by the number of synapses. The
exception to this was for the synapses onto edge neurons in the TC and
RE layers, where they were scaled by the number of synapses as in the
center of the layers, and for connections between the core and matrix PY
layers, in which they were scaled by the number of synapses within a
connectivity footprint.
Computational methods. All simulations described in the study were
performed using a forth-order Runge-Kutta integration method. The
time step was 0.02 ms. Source Cϩϩ code was compiled on a Linux server
using the GCC compiler.

Results
Human spindles have divergent EEG and MEG
synchronization properties
Typical simultaneous recordings of the EEG and MEG during
sleep spindles obtained from six normal human subjects in
stage 2 of nonpathological NREM sleep are displayed in Figure 3.
The high-density EEG confirmed widespread synchrony across
the scalp during spindles (Fig. 3A), whereas the MEG was highly
variable across the head (Fig. 3B) with widely varying phase and
amplitude in different sensors. Furthermore, the simultaneously
recorded EEG and MEG had low coherence and little discernable
relationship with each other (Fig. 3C). Spindles were generated
somewhat independently in different cortical areas (Fig. 3D).
Overall, the average coherence between pairs of MEG gradiometers was only ϳ0.3 during spindles, in contrast to the coherence
value of ϳ0.7 for EEG sensor pairs. The variability of spindles
across MEG sensors suggested that the signal may be formed by
multiple partially independent cortical generators, in contrast to
the EEG, which may instead be dominated by a weak but widespread spindle generator.
When simultaneously recorded in the MEG and EEG, the
spindle onset in the MEG preceded the EEG activity by one to two
cycles (Dehghani et al., 2011). The current sinks and sources
generating spindles (identified with linear microelectrode arrays)
were either in middle layers when spindles were focal in the overlying subdural grid or in superficial layers when spindles were
coherent in the grid (Cash et al., 2010).
Spindle oscillations are reproduced in a thalamocortical
network model using two segregated pathways
Previous models have reproduced regular spindle oscillations using a simplified, single thalamocortical pathway with a unique
layer for each cell type (Destexhe et al., 1998; Bazhenov et al.,
2002). To faithfully address the role of matrix and core thalamocortical pathways, we reproduced spindle oscillations in a spatially extensive four-layer model comprising two main distinct
but interconnected thalamocortical networks based on primate
literature (Jones, 2001, 2002; Zikopoulos and Barbas, 2007; see
Materials and Methods for details). Each pathway initially followed the parameters and topology of the thalamocortical model
proposed in an earlier model (Bazhenov et al., 2002); however, we
subsequently allowed the fanout of thalamocortical projections
to be up to five times wider in matrix versus core pathways. As in
previous models, the spindle oscillations were maintained by interactions between TC and RE neurons. Sequences of spindle
oscillations alternated with localized patterns of spike-burst activity propagating inside the RE network. New sequences of spindle oscillations were initiated by input from the RE nucleus onto
the TC cells after removal of Ih-mediated depolarization. RE activation was either mediated by intrinsic activity of the RE nucleus, as in the study by Bazhenov et al. (2000), or by spontaneous
cortical activity, as in the study by Destexhe et al. (1998).

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263 • 5255

Figure 3. Spindle recordings with EEG versus MEG sensors. A, Referential EEG waveforms from 60 scalp channels during a single spindle (superimposed) in a healthy subject during
natural sleep (1) and shown with voltage color coded (2). The EEG appears highly synchronous across the scalp. B, MEG spindle recorded by 204 gradiometers at the same time as A in the
same healthy human subjects. The MEG appears highly variable and asynchronous across the scalp. The EEG peaks, marked with vertical lines, show no regular relationship with MEG peak
activity. The arrows mark the peaks of a particular MEG channel that initially precedes and later follows the EEG peaks. C, Superposition of two of the largest amplitude EEG and MEG
waveforms during a single spindle (1) also shows that the EEG and the MEG have variable relationships during spindles. The instantaneous phase lag, found via the Hilbert transform,
varies considerably (2) [modified from Dehghani et al. (2010a)]. D, Spindles generated simultaneously in multiple regions of the cortex show variable (Figure legend continues.)

5256 • J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263

An example of the typical neuronal activity for simulated
spindle oscillations using the entire thalamocortical network
with both interconnected core and matrix pathways is shown in
Figure 4 (left column, core pathway; right column, matrix pathway). Some of the most salient properties of spindles known from
animal data (Steriade and Llinas, 1988) were reproduced in this
simulated activity, such as the waxing and waning of the membrane potential and the subharmonic firing (ϳ5 Hz) observed in
individual TC cells.
A single spindle sequence was usually observed during the 10 s
simulation, although multiple spontaneous spindles recurred for
longer simulations. Once the sequence initiated in the core pathway, it spread to the matrix pathway within ϳ700 ms (Fig. 4 A,
dotted vertical bars). Both LFPs and neuronal firing were dominated by ϳ10 Hz oscillatory rhythms lasting, on average, 2.9 Ϯ
0.45 s during the subsequent autonomously organized spindle
discharge, values within the physiological range (Steriade and
McCarley, 2005). The LFPs of the underlying activity for both
core and matrix were characterized by a typical waxing-andwaning envelope (Fig. 4 A, top traces), as did the membrane potentials for the cellular activity of TC cells during rebound spike
bursts (Fig. 4 A, second to fourth traces; IN not displayed).
The population dynamics of each subsystem confirmed that
the site of initiation of spindles occurred in the core and preceded, by a few hundreds of milliseconds, the occurrence of spontaneous spindles in the matrix subsystem (Fig. 4 B). Although the
initiation and the first cycle of oscillation were qualitatively similar in the two distinct pathways, the spatial propagation of the
spindle sequence was more synchronous in the matrix than in the
core (Fig. 4 B), a fundamental property of these pathways, as
shown later. In each network, the spindle oscillation started from
one edge of the layer and propagated to the opposite edge at a
velocity close to 2.5 mm/s (Fig. 4 B). The termination of the
spindle sequence was also well defined temporally in the matrix pathway, as opposed to the core where the oscillation
waned asynchronously, suggesting that the spread and
strength of corticothalamic feedback influences spindle termination (Bonjean et al., 2011).
These data suggest that the focused corticothalamic projections of the core pathway facilitate spindle initiation¸ whereas the
diffuse connections that characterize the matrix pathway are conducive to creating synchronization. We investigate below the impact of the breadth of thalamocortical connectivity in the
synchronization properties of spindles.
Matrix and core pathways exhibited different degrees of
synchrony during spindle generation
The breadth of connectivity in the core and matrix was investigated by performing simulations in which the matrix thalamo4
(Figure legend continued.) phase relationships and relative amplitudes. In each of the five
spindles recorded in patients underlying presurgical epileptic mapping, six depth sites with
locally generated spindles (colored traces) and one scalp site (Fz, black trace) are superimposed.
Different cortical generators are relatively larger in different spindles or portions of spindles
(colored asterisks). Local generation was assured by choosing transcortical bipolar depth recordings (e.g., with one lead in white matter and one in CSF), with spindles that were larger and
polarity inverted from adjacent leads. E, Participation by different cortical areas varies across
spindles. Power from 7 to 14 Hz was calculated for moving 0.5 s epochs, and each channel was
normalized to its peak amplitude in the 60 s epoch. Although most, but not necessarily all,
cortical locations participate in the larger spindles (ˆ), the relative amplitudes of different locations varies across spindles (*), and there are times where spindles are being generated in many
cortical locations in both hemispheres but are not recorded at the scalp (v). Plastic screw guides
were used so the scalp EEG remained insulated from the brain by the skull, as in controls.

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

cortical and corticothalamic connections became increasingly
diffuse, whereas connections in the core pathway remained focal (see
Materials and Methods). The two pathways only differed in their
respective connectivity profiles and otherwise shared the same properties. Although the core thalamic cell afferents terminate with large
boutons and the matrix projections terminate in a dense matrix of
small boutons (Zikopoulos and Barbas, 2007), structural characteristics that are useful for anatomically differentiating the two pathways, these features were not included in the model.
When the profiles of the matrix and core connections (i.e.,
TC3{PY,IN} and PY3{TC,RE} connections) were identical
(Fig. 5A, top), the characteristics of spindle activity were similar
in both networks (Fig. 5A, bottom). After being initiated in the
core, the spindle propagated to the matrix by a latency of ϳ700
ms. The degree of synchrony in the two pathways during a spindle
sequence was indistinguishable (Fig. 5A). Similarly, the termination of the sequence could not be qualitatively distinguished between the core and matrix.
We next analyzed and quantified how the fanout of
thalamocortical connections affected the degree of synchrony
during spindle generation within the core and matrix pathways. When the fanout of the thalamocortical (TC3{PY;IN})
and corticothalamic (PY3{TC;RE}) matrix connections significantly increased while maintaining constant focal core
connectivity (Fig. 5B, top), the cortical spindle activity appeared more synchronous in the matrix compared with the
spindle activity in the core (Fig. 5B, bottom). As before, the
spindles were initiated in the core and propagated to the matrix with a delay. A striking difference between the degree of
synchrony in the two networks was observed in such circumstances. Whereas the core network population activity was
qualitatively identical as in Figure 5A, the matrix network
population had a significantly higher degree of synchrony,
with nearly simultaneous cortical firing within the whole layer
on each burst cycle. These synchrony differences were quantified by the Schreiber measure (see text below).
Sample LFP traces from three different virtual recording sites
of the matrix network were simulated for both focal (Fig. 5Ca)
and diffuse (Fig. 5Cb) fanouts. The three virtual sites were, respectively, located at the top, center, and bottom of the matrix
layer and were equally separated from each other (compare Fig.
5A, bottom, horizontal arrows). In agreement with the spatiotemporal plots, the three LFPs recorded from a single cortical
layer were incommensurate when the fanout was focal and topographically limited (Fig. 5Ca). Conversely, the LFP traces were
better phase locked and showed very similar spindle duration
when the cortical layer had a diffuse fanout (Fig. 5Cb).
We quantified the degree of synchrony of the cortical LFPs
using the Schreiber reliability measure R as a metric (Schreiber et
al., 2003; see Materials and Methods). We varied the thalamocortical and the corticothalamic fanouts of the matrix, whereas the
connectivity profile of the core remained focal and constant
(compare Fig. 1 B, C, dashed lines). In so doing, we observed that
the synchrony value increased as a function of the fanout width of
the thalamocortical connectivity in the matrix pathway. Indeed,
synchronous activity in the superficial cortical layers became
more prevalent as the fanout of the projections broadened (from
the matrix pathway). The red (Fig. 5, respectively blue) dots denote the degree of synchrony value for the matrix (respectively
core) pathway with error bars for the SD (n ϭ 10 simulations).
When both the core and matrix footprints were focal and equal to
11 (i.e., each TC cell projected to 11 PY cells), the two pathways
had the same measure of synchrony (ϳ0.21). As the matrix foot-

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263 • 5257

A Cellular acƟvity
Core pathway

(a)

Matrix pathway

LFP

LFP
10 mV
1000 ms

(b)

PY

PY

TC

TC

RE

RE
50 mV
(*)

1000 ms

(*)

spindle sequence
initiated in ‘core’ subsystem

B PopulaƟon dynamics
Core pathway

Matrix pathway

PY

PY

100

(mV)
Membrane potential

Cell number

100

200

200
TC

TC

25

25

50

50
RE

RE

0

−40

−80

25

25

50

50
2
(*)

4

6

Time (s)

8

10

2
(*)

4

6

8

10

Time (s)

spindle sequence
initiated in ‘core’ subsystem

Figure 4. Canonical spindles. A, Top, Local field potentials in the cortical domains of the core and matrix networks during a 10 s simulation of spindle activity. Bottom, Voltage traces
of individual neurons (PY, TC, and RE) in each layer of core and matrix networks (blue and red backgrounds, respectively). The time of spindle initiation in the core system is indicated by
the vertical arrows. B, Space–time plot representing the activity of the whole model for 10 s, showing the pattern of wave propagation within core and matrix networks. Individual
membrane potential activity from A corresponds to the cell in the middle of each respective layer (cell 100 of PY, and 25 of TC and RE) of B. The value of the membrane potential for each
neuron is coded by the false color scale. The time of spindle initiation in the core network is indicated by the arrows. (Results are shown for the case with matrix TC3 PY fanout is 41,
whereas the core TC3 PY fanout is 5).

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

5258 • J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263

A

B
PY
IN

(a)

PY
IN

(a)

TC
RE

TC
RE

Core

Core

Matrix

(b)

Matrix

(b)
Matrix
cell number

cell number

Matrix
50
100
150

50
100
150
200

200

Core
cell number

cell number

Core
50
100
150
200

1

2

3

4

5

6

50
100
150
200

7

1

2

Time (sec)

3

4

5

6

7

Time (sec)

C

D

(a)

0.4

Core
Matrix

Degree of synchrony R

0.35

(b)
0.3

(a)
0.25

0.2

(b)

0

20

40

60

80

100

Matrix TC PY footprint [neurons]

10 mV
1000 ms

Figure 5. Spindle synchronization measure. A, Top, Schematic diagram illustrating the connection profile used for the core and matrix networks (situation of equal and focal fanout for both
pathways). Bottom, Space–time plots of cortical core and matrix pathways using the connection profile (top) during a 7 s simulation of spindle activity. B, Top, Schematic diagram illustrating the
connection profile used for the core and matrix networks (situation of focal fanout for the core pathway only). The matrix fanout is now diffuse. Bottom, Space–time plots of cortical core and matrix
pathways using the connection profile (top) during a 7 s simulation of spindle activity. C, LFP traces for cortical neurons in the matrix pathway under the connectivity profiles used in A and B. The three
virtual recording sites are indicated by the horizontal arrows in B. D, Quantification of the degree of synchrony of cortical activity in both core (blue dots) and matrix (red dots) as a function of different
thalamocortical and corticothalamic footprints in the matrix pathway (footprints in the core are kept identical). Each dot represents the average of 10 simulations Ϯ SD. Letters a and b correspond
to the LFPs represented in Ca and Cd, respectively.

print increased from 11 to 101, the degree of synchrony R for this
pathway reached 0.34 (ANOVA; F ϭ 51; df ϭ 19Ј p Ͻ 10 Ϫ5), a
62% increase compared with the initial value (Fig. 5D, red dots).
In contrast, the cortical core synchrony was unaffected by a
change in the matrix fanout (Fig. 5D, blue dots).
Impact of feedforward versus feedback and probability of
intercortical connections
Both feedforward thalamocortical and feedback corticothalamic
projections may affect the degree of synchrony observed in the

core and matrix networks. To unravel the specific role of each
projection type, we performed simulations varying the fanout of
one projection of the matrix while keeping the fanout of the other
pathway focal (see model; Fig. 1 B, C, black dashed lines). As
before, the core network had constant focal connectivity for all
simulations. The diffuse feedforward thalamocortical connections of the matrix were primarily responsible for producing
more synchronous spindles in the matrix cortical layers than in
the core, and, accordingly, the degree of synchrony in the spindle

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263 • 5259

chrony (see model; Fig. 2 B, C, gray dashed
lines). We maintained the footprint for
cortical connections between layers the
same as that of connections within a given
cortical layer; however, each intercortical
connection between the matrix and core
cortical layers was made with probability
p within the footprint. The default probability in previous simulations was p ϭ
0.02. Varying the probability of connectivity from p ϭ 0 to p ϭ 0.5, we saw no
significant influence on the degree of synchrony of the core and matrix pathways
(Fig. 6 B). That observation held whether
the matrix footprint was focal (Fig. 6 Ba)
or diffuse (Fig. 6 Bb), with the core footprint remaining constant (TC3 PY ϭ 11)
throughout. From this, we can conclude
that the only major architectural parameter that significantly affected the synchrony measure was the spread of the
feedforward thalamocortical footprint,
whereas neither the cortical feedback
projections to the thalamus nor the corticocortical connectivity significantly impacted spindle synchrony.
Impact of the intrathamic connections
on spindle synchronization
Although the core and matrix pathways
have been clearly identified, the extent of
reticulo-reticular connections between
these two pathways yet remained unknown. In our initial model, we used a
limited connectivity profile between the
core and matrix reticular nuclei. Here, we
wanted to assess the impact of a progressive overlap between the two reticular
layers on the spindle synchrony. We
found that, as the degree of RE–RE overlap increased up to 50 cells per layer, so
did the synchrony degree for both core
and matrix pathways (Fig. 6C).
We also tested the hypothesis of a lesion at the reticular level, thereby isolating
core and matrix reticular nuclei from each
other. In this case, we found that although
the spindle was still initiated and susFigure 6. Roles of increased connectivity between different neuronal populations in corticocortical synchrony of spindle discharges. A, tained in the core, the thalamic lesion preImpact of feedforward versus feedback footprints in the matrix pathway. a, Evolution of the degree of synchrony R as a function of the vented the matrix from being recruited in
feedforward thalamocortical connections. b, Evolution of the degree of synchrony R as a function of the feedback thalamocortical connec- the spindle oscillatory activity. A progrestions.(CoreconnectionsremainedfocalforAaandAb).B,Impactoftheprobabilityofcorticocorticalconnectionsbetweencoreandmatrix sive increase in the density of intercortical
networks. a, Both core and matrix networks have an equal focal fanout. b, Core fanout was focal whereas matrix fanout was more diffuse.
connections did not succeed in recruiting
C, Impact of the overlap between the two reticular layers (core and matrix) on the spindle synchrony.
the matrix, confirming that reticular neurons, which can be recruited by cortical
activity was significantly higher in the matrix than in the core
cells,
are
critical
in
the
initiation of spindle oscillation.
Ϫ6
(Fig. 6 Aa; ANOVA, F ϭ 58, df ϭ 19, p Ͻ 10 ). In contrast,
increasing only the footprint size of the feedback connections
from the cortex to the thalamus in the matrix system did not
significantly affect the synchrony of spindle activity (Fig. 6 Ab;
ANOVA, F ϭ 1.42, df ϭ 19, p Ͼ 0.1).
We also examined how the interconnectivity density between
the core and matrix cortical layers affected the degree of syn-

Latency and duration of spindles in the core and
matrix systems
Finally, we addressed the impact of corticocortical connectivity on
the latency of spindle initiation between the core and the matrix, as
well as the duration of spindle sequences in both networks. To en-

5260 • J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

sure similar initial states for different simulations, the initial spindle was always
initiated by external stimulation to the core.
Surprisingly, the breadth of connections
in the core and matrix did not reliably affect
the latency of spindle initiation between
these two thalamocortical pathways, as
shown by the absence of significant difference in the spindle latency when the fanout
diffusiveness in the matrix was varied under
fixed intercortical connectivity probability
(Fig. 7A; p ϭ 0.02). However, the degree of
interconnection alone between the core and
matrix greatly impacted the spindle latency
between these pathways (Fig. 7B). As the
probability p of intercortical connections
increased, the propagation delay between
the two pathways decreased under fixed
thalamocortical footprints (Fig. 7B). For example, the spindle initiation latency was 817
ms for a low cortical interconnection probability (p ϭ 0.02) but decreased to 150 ms
for higher probability values (p ϭ 0.3) under constant thalamocortical footprints, as
illustrated by membrane potential traces in
Fig. 7, Ca and Cb, respectively.
The duration of spindle sequences in Figure 7. Connectivity factors affecting the delay from spindle onset in the core versus matrix systems. A, Latency of spindle
the core and matrix was quantitatively propagation between core and matrix networks as a function of the matrix thalamocortical fanout (core fanout kept constant). B,
comparable when the footprints in both Latency of spindle propagation between core and matrix networks as a function of the probability p of corticocortical connections
networks were equal and focal (Fig. 8 A). between the two networks (core and matrix fanout kept constant). C, Example of individual voltage traces for pyramidal cells in the
But increasing the corticocortical proba- core and matrix pathway illustrating the latency of spindle propagation between the two pathways. a, For p ϭ 0.02 (compare
bility between the two pathways slightly vertical arrow in Ba). b, For p ϭ 0.3 (compare vertical arrow in Bb).
increased the spindle duration from an
pathways in the fanout of thalamocortical projections best explains
average of 2.9 s in both networks for p ϭ 0.02–3.3 (resp. 3.6)
the discrepancies in spindle synchronization between scalp EEG and
seconds in the core (resp. matrix) for p ϭ 0.5 (Fig. 8 A).
MEG recordings.
The same assessment for the influence of interconnection probabilSpecifically, we have shown that whereas the spindle activity
ity on spindle duration was performed under a more diffuse footprint
was initiated in the core pathway, the matrix pathway contribfor the matrix pathway (TC3PY ϭ 83), whereas the core remained
uted to the widespread spindle synchronization across the netconstant and focal (TC3PY ϭ 11). Under these different condiwork. Surprisingly, we found that the spread of corticothalamic
tions, we similarly found no statistically significant differences
connections, unlike thalamocortical ones, had little significance
in the average spindle sequence duration between the two
on spindle coherence. Finally, we found that the latency of spinthalamocortical pathways [2.9 s for p ϭ 0.02; 3.2 s (core) and 3.9 s
dle propagation between the core and the matrix pathways was
(matrix) for p ϭ 0.5, n.s.; Fig. 8B).
constrained by the probability of corticocortical connections beTogether, these results indicate that, on the one hand, the breadth of
tween the two systems.
connections (matrix fanout) neither statistically influence the average
spindle latency between core and matrix nor the average spindle seSynchrony divergence between electroencephalography
quence duration, at odds with its role in spindle synchronization as
or magnetoencephalography
shown previously and in line with the literature (Contreras et al.,
In simultaneous EEG/MEG recordings, spindle activity was
1996b, 1997; Destexhe et al., 1998). On the other hand, although the
sometimes detected in one of the modalities only (Hughes et al.,
cortical interconnection probability played no significant role in
1976; Nakasato et al., 1990; Yoshida et al., 1996; Manshanden et
spindle synchrony, it was, however, the key factor to constrain spinal., 2002; Dehghani et al., 2011). Recently, Dehghani et al. (2010a)
dle initiation latency between the core and matrix.
reported that the MEG signal was asynchronous and varied
Discussion
strongly in amplitude and phase across locations and across spinThis study was motivated by recent findings that human spindles
dles, unlike the simultaneously recorded EEG, which was spatially
simultaneously recorded by EEG and MEG sensors have strikingly
and temporally highly coherent across the scalp and across spindifferent characteristics (Dehghani et al., 2010a,b, 2011). Here, we
dles. Overall, the average coherence between pairs of MEG grahave explored a mechanism to explain the spatiotemporal properties
diometers was only ϳ0.3 during spindles, in contrast to the
and synchronization differences found in human spindle oscillacoherence value of ϳ0.7 for EEG sensor pairs. Moreover, many
tions. Implementing a computational model incorporating the
spindle epochs were visible in the MEG but not in the EEG (Deknown anatomical properties of two separate thalamocortical nethghani et al., 2011). When they did appear in both modalities, the
works (“core” and “matrix”) found in nonhuman primates (Jones,
spindle in the MEG led that in the EEG by ϳ190 ms on average
2001), we have shown that the difference between core and matrix
(Dehghani et al., 2010a).

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263 • 5261

(Zikopoulos and Barbas, 2007). In contrast, relay cells from the matrix project
very diffusely, often to multiple cortical
areas, and terminate in a dense matrix of
small boutons in layer I, associated with
the slow modulatory NMDA and metabotropic transmission (Rubio-Garrido et al.,
2009).
Although some of the differences in
glutamate receptors and synaptic morphology between matrix and core were
not included in the model, its architecture
critically incorporated the essential differences between the focal thalamocortical
connections in the core and the more diffuse and widespread connectivity of the
matrix. This difference of thalamocortical
Figure 8. Spindle duration as a function of connectivity between and within systems. The average spindle duration of a spindle fanout was in itself sufficient to explain
sequence in both core (blue dots) and matrix (red dots) networks is shown. Each dot represents mean value Ϯ SD. A, With both core the synchrony mismatch between the core
and matrix pathways.
and matrix fanouts equal and focal. B, With focal core fanout and diffuse matrix fanout.
Our results can explain the discrepancies outlined above between the EEG and
The variability of spindles across MEG sensors may reflect mulMEG recorded during sleep spindles. Cortical anatomy comtiple partially independent cortical generators, whereas EEG recordbined with the biophysics of signal propagation (i.e., the so-called
ings may instead be dominated by a weak but widespread unique
“forward solution”) predicts that the MEG would be more sensispindle generator. These empirical observations led to the hypothetive to focal activity and the EEG more sensitive to distributed
sis that the MEG and EEG primarily record spindles from different
sources (Dehghani et al., 2010a, 2011). Using models incorporatthalamocortical pathways, specifically the core and matrix pathways,
ing the subcranial CSF, the calculated leadfields, i.e., the cortical
respectively. This interpretation suggests that spindles occur first in
areas projecting to each sensor, were ϳ25 times larger for referthe core pathway and then quickly spread to the matrix pathway,
ential EEG sensors than for MEG gradiometers (A. Irimia, E.
which contributes to the widespread synchronization of spindles
Halgren, personal communication). Furthermore, when a disacross the cortical network, an interpretation that was observed and
tributed current generator was active, Ͻ30% of the referential
confirmed in the present study.
EEG signal was canceled, unlike up to 90% for the MEG. We can
The volume conduction effects that smear the EEG, relative to
conclude that the EEG is therefore more biased toward diffusely
MEG, may explain the differences in global versus focal cohersynchronous spindle generators, as produced by the cortical maence during spindle activity. In other words, the lead fields assotrix pathway, whereas the MEG is more likely to pick up the
ciated with EEG are smoother and more distributed than those of
activity from focal asynchronous spindle generators, as produced
the MEG. As a consequence, focal synchrony will appear to be
by the cortical core pathway.
more globally coherent over sensors. However, this is not a sufAsynchronous activation of various core thalamocortical doficient explanation for the synchrony differences between the
mains may be visible in the varying location, frequency, and synEEG and MEG because (1) intracranial recordings acquired at the
chrony of spindles in the MEG. The local generation of spindles
same time as noninvasive electromagnetic measures suggest that
could be found in many cortical locations, including ventrolateral
EEG and MEG signals are generated in different cortical layers. It
frontal and temporal areas, such as in the left middle frontal gyrus,
is this fact that motivates the current study, in which we propose
left inferior frontal sulcus, left middle temporal gyrus, left cingulate
that both local and global synchrony could coexist and that the
sulcus, right inferior frontal gyrus, right superior frontal gyrus, right
EEG is selectively sensitive to global synchrony, and (2) the exisprecentral sulcus, and right middle temporal gyrus (Cash et al.,
tence of the relatively large phase delays between MEG signals in
2010).
vivo that commonly exceed the period of spindle oscillations (Fig.
Synchronization of focal thalamocortical domains during
3) suggests that the averaging of the MEG signal over the larger
spindles by the matrix pathway into coherent discharge may be
volume would only lead to the loss of periodicity.
visible in the EEG (Dehghani et al., 2010a, 2011).
We gained additional insight as to the differential role of the
Core mediates multiple focal generators, whereas matrix
two thalamocortical networks via laminar recordings during
mediates large-scale synchrony
spindle oscillations. CSD analysis of multielectrode depth rePrevious models of spindle oscillations did not consider the difcordings during spindles obtained in five subjects recorded durferences between core and matrix thalamocortical pathways. Our
ing natural stage 2 sleep suggested that spindle generation
model is the first to incorporate these two thalamocortical netinvolved multiple systems. CSD profiles showed two patterns of
works and to investigate the impact of their topological differlaminar spindle activity (Cash et al., 2010). The first pattern was
ences on spindle activity. Specifically, our model captures the
generated by widely separated source/sink current pairs in deep
distinct thalamocortical projections between the core and the
and superficial layers, and the second pattern was generated by
matrix pathways found in nonhuman primates (Jones, 2001).
adjacent source/sink pairs in the middle layers. The first pattern
Relay cells from the core project to a highly restricted target doof spindle activity, consistent with an input from the matrix cells
main, typically terminating with large boutons in layer IV, which
in the thalamus, had low spatial coherence, whereas the second,
transmit focal sensory information via ionotropic receptors
consistent with input from the core thalamocortical projections,

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization

5262 • J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263

had high spatial coherence (S. Cash and E. Halgren, unpublished
observations). From this, we can draw a conclusion on the different roles for the matrix and the core thalamocortical pathways.
Interactions between the core and matrix networks
In our model, spindle activity, which initiated in the core, was
transmitted to the matrix with a delay that was inversely proportional to the density of corticocortical connections between the
two networks. This transfer of spontaneous activity from the core
to the matrix could lead to the large-scale synchronization of
multiple focal, scattered spindle generators. It was shown recently
that sleep spindles are predominantly local and occur separately
in specific regions, mostly confined to local circuits (Nir et al.,
2011; see also Fig. 3D). Our results, in line with this study, suggest
that the local, distributed core pathways underlie local spindles,
whereas global spindle activity is a result of the synchronization
by the matrix pathway.
The delay in the spread of activity from one system to another
explains the loose linkage between spindles recorded with the
MEG and EEG experimentally. Our model shows that intercortical connectivity between the matrix and core can tune the value
of this delay. The propagation latency in the model that best
matched the experimental results (the MEG leads the EEG by
ϳ190 ms; cf. Dehghani et al., 2011) was obtained with an intercortical connection probability between the core and the matrix
of ϳ0.25.
In our study, although the involvement of the thalamocortical
circuitry was required for synchronization, varying the range of
corticothalamic feedback did not significantly influence the synchrony when the fanout of feedforward (thalamocortical) connections was small. This predicts that in the brain, only the fanout
of the feedforward thalamocortical and not the corticothalamic
feedback affects spindle synchronization. One possible explanation is that corticothalamic feedback onto the population of inhibitory reticular thalamic neurons reduces the synchronizing
effects of corticothalamic input through lateral inhibitory interactions among the reticular thalamic neurons.
The modeling results support a mechanism whereby the
spread of spindle discharges from the core to matrix occurs by
intercortical coupling, as well as through thalamocortical loops,
but without the involvement of interthalamic synchronizing
mechanisms. In the model, the corticocortical connectivity had
little impact on the spindle coherence within core and matrix, in
agreement with Contreras et al. (1996b). In contrast, the probability of corticocortical connections between these two pathways
did influence the latency and duration of spindle sequences.
The ultimate test of our hypothesis would be a selective inactivation of neurons in the thalamus where the cells in the matrix
and core systems are somewhat segregated. Our model predicts
that the core cells would engage in spindles rather independently
of each other and with spotty cortical synchronization, whereas
the matrix cells would tend to engage synchronously in spindles,
synchronously with each other and across the cortical areas.
Therefore, inactivation of the core (resp. matrix) thalamic populations should decrease (resp. increase) the appearance of spindles in deep versus superficial cortical layers and affect the overall
level of spindle synchronization. The techniques for such manipulations currently become available (e.g., optogenetic stimulation); however, these experiments are only feasible in rodents,
and we currently have no data to evaluate the spatiotemporal
properties of spindles across cortical layers in such settings. The
other prediction is that the core pattern spindles with current
sinks and sources concentrated in middle cortical layers would

tend to be focal and asynchronous, whereas the matrix, generated
in superficial cortical layers, would tend to be synchronous and
widespread. In other words, the prediction is that there would be
a correlation between the cortical layer generating the spindle and
the degree of synchrony it exhibits with other cortical areas. These
recordings are possible in humans using depth electrodes and
could provide a valuable test of our model.
Conclusion
The thalamocortical model described herein explains the empirical results from simultaneous recordings of the EEG and MEG
during spindles, and supports the working hypothesis that more
synchronous, spatially coherent spindle activity is generated in
the matrix pathway because of the broad and widespread
thalamocortical projections pertaining to this network. In contrast, spindle activities in the core pathway are less spatially coherent because the thalamic projections are more focal.
Surprisingly, the corticothalamic feedback projections are ineffective in supporting greater spindle synchrony. Although core
spindles are mostly independent across the cortical surface,
functionally related cortical columns may be synchronized by the
matrix even if they are not adjacent. Synchronization between
distant columns arises mainly because the thalamocortical feedforward projections of the matrix pathway are widespread. This
study reconciles the discrepancies observed in simultaneous recordings of the MEG and EEG during spindles, and proposes a
principle mechanism based on anatomical observations from the
primate. This sheds new light onto the different mechanisms of
thalamocortical and corticothalamic projections underlying local
and global spindles.

References
Alzheimer C, Schwindt PC, Crill WE (1993) Modal gating of Naϩ channels
as a mechanism of persistent Naϩ current in pyramidal neurons from rat
and cat sensorimotor cortex. J Neurosci 13:660 – 673.
Bal T, McCormick DA (1996) What stops synchronized thalamocortical oscillations? Neuron 17:297–308.
Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, Sejnowski TJ (1998) Computational
models of thalamocortical augmenting responses. J Neurosci
18:6444 – 6465.
Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, Sejnowski TJ (1999) Self-sustained
rhythmic activity in the thalamic reticular nucleus mediated by depolarizing GABAA receptor potentials. Nat Neurosci 2:168 –174.
Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, Sejnowski T (2000) Spiking-bursting
activity in the thalamic reticular nucleus initiates sequences of spindle
oscillations in thalamic networks. J Neurophysiol 84:1076 –1087.
Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, Sejnowski T (2002) Model of
thalamocortical slow-wave sleep oscillations and transitions to activated
states. J Neurosci 22:8691– 8704.
Bonjean M, Baker T, Lemieux M, Timofeev I, Sejnowski T, Bazhenov M
(2011) Corticothalamic feedback controls sleep spindle duration in vivo.
J Neurosci 31:9124 –9134.
Cash S, Halgren E, Bazhenov M, Sejnowski TJ (2010) Multiscale measurement, analysis and modeling of human sleep spindles. Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience (CRCNS), Principal Investigator
Meeting, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland (June 7).
Contreras D, Steriade M (1996) Spindle oscillation in cats: the role of
corticothalamic feedback in a thalamically generated rhythm. J Physiol
490:159 –179.
Contreras D, Timofeev I, Steriade M (1996a) Mechanisms of long-lasting
hyperpolarizations underlying slow sleep oscillations in cat corticothalamic networks. J Physiol 494:251–264.
Contreras D, Destexhe A, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (1996b) Control of spatiotemporal coherence of a thalamic oscillation by corticothalamic feedback. Science 274:771–774.
Contreras D, Destexhe A, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (1997) Spatiotemporal
patterns of spindle oscillations in cortex and thalamus. J Neurosci
17:1179 –1196.

Bonjean, Baker et al. • Thalamocortical Systems in Spindle Synchronization
Dehghani N, Cash SS, Rossetti AO, Chen CC, Halgren E (2010a) Magnetoencephalography demonstrates multiple asynchronous generators during
human sleep spindles. J Neurophysiol 1 04:179 –188.
Dehghani N, Cash SS, Chen CC, Hagler DJ Jr., Huang M, Dale AM, Halgren
E (2010b) Divergent cortical generators of MEG and EEG during human
sleep spindles suggested by distributed source modeling. PLoS One
5:e11454.
Dehghani N, Cash SS, Halgren E (2011) Emergence of synchronous EEG
spindles from asynchronous MEG spindles. Hum Brain Mapp 32:2217–
2227.
Destexhe A, Babloyantz A (1993) A model of the inward current Ih and its
possible role in thalamocortical oscillations. NeuroReport 4:223–226.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (1994) A model of spindle rhythmicity in the isolated thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurophysiol
72:803– 818.
Destexhe A, Bal T, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ (1996) Ionic mechanisms
underlying synchronized oscillations and propagating waves in a model of
ferret thalamic slices. J Neurophysiol 76:2049 –2070.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Steriade M (1998) Mechanisms underlying the
synchronizing action of corticothalamic feedback through inhibition of
thalamic relay cells. J Neurophysiol 79:999 –1016.
Golomb D, Amitai Y (1997) Propagating neuronal discharges in neocortical slices: computational and experimental study. J Neurophysiol
78:1199 –1211.
Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF (1952) A quantitative description of membrane
current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve.
J Physiol 117:500 –544.
Hughes JR, Hendrix DE, Cohen J, Duffy FH, Mayman CI, Scholl ML, Cuffin
BN (1976) Relationship of the magnetoencephalogram to the electroencephalogram. Normal wake and sleep activity. Electroencephalogr Clin
Neurophysiol 40:261–278.
Huguenard JR, McCormick DA (1992) Simulation of the currents involved in rhythmic oscillations in thalamic relay neurons. J Neurophysiol 68:1373–1383.
Jones EG (2001) The thalamic matrix and thalamocortical synchrony.
Trends Neurosci 24:595– 601.
Jones EG (2002) Thalamic circuitry and thalamocortical synchrony. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 357:1659 –1673.
Kay AR, Sugimori M, Llina´s R (1998) Kinetic and stochastic properties of a
persistent sodium current in mature guinea pig cerebellar Purkinje cells.
J Neurophysiol 80:1167–1179.
Kim U, Bal T, McCormick DA (1995) Spindle waves are propagating synchronized oscillations in the ferret LGNd in vitro. J Neurophysiol
74:1301–1323.
Luthi A, McCormick DA (1998) Periodicity of thalamic synchronized oscillations: the role of Ca2ϩ-mediated upregulation of Ih. Neuron 20:553–
563.

J. Neurosci., April 11, 2012 • 32(15):5250 –5263 • 5263
Mainen ZF, Sejnowski TJ (1996) Influence of dendritic structure on firing
pattern in model neocortical neurons. Nature 382:363–366.
Manshanden I, De Munck JC, Simon NR, Lopes da Silva FH (2002) Source
localization of MEG sleep spindles and the relation to sources of alpha
band rhythms. Clin Neurophysiol 113:1937–1947.
McCormick DA, Pape HC (1990) Properties of a hyperpolarizationactivated cation current and its role in rhythmic oscillation in thalamic
relay neurones. J Physiol 431:291–318.
Morison RS, Bassett DL (1945) Electrical activity of the thalamus and basal
ganglia in decorticate cats. J Neurophysiol 8:309 –314.
Nakasato N, Kado H, Nakanishi M, Koyanagi M, Kasai N, Niizuma H, Yoshimoto T (1990) Magnetic detection of sleep spindles in normal subjects. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 76:123–130.
Nir Y, Staba RJ, Andrillon T, Vyazovskiy VV, Cirelli C, Fried I, Tononi G
(2011) Regional slow waves and spindles in human sleep. Neuron
70:153–169.
Nunez PL, Srinivasan R (2006) Electric fields of the brain. Oxford: Oxford UP.
Rubio-Garrido P, Pe´rez-de-Manzo F, Porrero C, Galazo MJ, Clasca´, F (2009)
Thalamic input to distal apical dendrites in neocortical layer 1 is massive
and highly convergent. Cereb Cortex 19:2380 –2395.
Schreiber S, Fellous JM, Whitmer D, Tiesinga P, Sejnowski TJ (2003) A new
correlation-based measure of spike timing reliability. Neurocomputing
52:925–931.
Sejnowski TJ, Destexhe A (2000) Why do we sleep? Brain Res 886:208 –223.
Steriade M, Llina´s RR (1988) The functional states of the thalamus and the
associated neuronal interplay. Physiol Rev 68:649 –742.
Steriade M, McCarley RW (2005) Brain control of wakefulness and sleep.
New York: Kluwer Academic.
Timofeev I, Grenier F, Bazhenov M, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (2000) Origin
of slow cortical oscillations in deafferented cortical slabs. Cereb Cortex
10:1185–1199.
Traub RD, Miles R (1991) Multiple modes of neuronal population activity
emerge after modifying specific synapses in a model of the CA3 region of
the hippocampus. Ann N Y Acad Sci 627:277–290.
Traub RD, Wong RK, Miles R, Michelson H (1991) A model of a CA3 hippocampal pyramidal neuron incorporating voltage-clamp data on intrinsic conductances. J Neurophysiol 66:635– 650.
Ulrich D, Huguenard JR (1997) GABA(A)-receptor-mediated rebound burst
firing and burst shunting in thalamus. J Neurophysiol 78:1748 –1751.
von Krosigk M, Bal T, McCormick DA (1993) Cellular mechanisms of a
synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science 261:361–364.
Yoshida H, Iramina K, Ueno S (1996) Source models of sleep spindles using
MEG and EEG measurements. Brain Topogr 8:303–307.
Zikopoulos B, Barbas H (2007) Parallel driving and modulatory pathways
link the prefrontal cortex. PLoS One 2:e848.

