Thehttp://nro.sagepub.com/
Neuroscientist

Sleep Spindles: Where They Come From, What They Do
Anita Lüthi
Neuroscientist 2014 20: 243 originally published online 27 August 2013
DOI: 10.1177/1073858413500854
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://nro.sagepub.com/content/20/3/243

Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

Additional services and information for The Neuroscientist can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://nro.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://nro.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav

>> Version of Record - May 14, 2014
OnlineFirst Version of Record - Aug 27, 2013
What is This?

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

500854

research-article2013

NROXXX10.1177/1073858413500854The NeuroscientistLüthi

Review

Sleep Spindles: Where They Come From,
What They Do

The Neuroscientist
2014, Vol. 20(3) 243­–256
© The Author(s) 2013
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1073858413500854
nro.sagepub.com

Anita Lüthi1

Abstract
Sleep spindles are extensively studied electroencephalographic rhythms that recur periodically during non–rapid eye
movement sleep and that are associated with rhythmic discharges of neurons throughout the thalamocortical system.
Their occurrence thus constrains many aspects of the communication between thalamus and cortex, ranging from
sensory transmission, to cortical plasticity and learning, to development and disease. I review these functional aspects
in conjunction with novel findings on the cellular and molecular makeup of spindle-pacemaking circuits. A highlight
in the search of roles for sleep spindles is the repeated finding that spindles correlate with memory consolidation in
humans and animals. By illustrating that spindles are at the forefront understanding on how the brain might benefit
from sleep rhythms, I hope to stimulate further experimentation.
Keywords
NREM sleep, EEG, rhythm, voltage-gated calcium channel, inhibition, burst, sensory transmission, learning, CaV3
channel, cyclic AMP

What Are Sleep Spindle Waves?
Sleep spindles are brief oscillatory events that appear in
the human electroencephalogram (EEG) during periods
of drowsiness and sleep. These brain-generated electrical
rhythms are prominent EEG hallmarks of non–rapid eye
movement (NREM) sleep, which makes up for ~80% of
a normal night’s sleep. Per night, 4 to 5 epochs of ~90
minutes are spent in NREM sleep. Stage N1 of NREM
sleep refers to drowsiness, stage N2 to light sleep, and
stage N3 to deep and restorative sleep. The remaining
20% consist of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep that is
well-known for the rapid movements of the eyes and for
vivid dreaming periods.
During NREM sleep, the brain generates electrical
rhythms that are synchronized throughout large cortical
areas. The NREM sleep EEG shows a continuous power
spectrum of frequencies, from 0.75 Hz up to tens of
Hertz, with a broad peak centered at ~0.5 to 4 Hz, indicating a dominance of low-frequency rhythms. Three
rhythms have a distinct graphical signature on a background of ongoing oscillations and serve as EEG hallmarks of NREM sleep: the K-complexes (0.5-1 Hz), delta
(δ) rhythms (1-4 Hz), and the sleep spindles, also referred
to as the sleep sigma (σ) band (10-15 Hz). A single sleep
spindle lasts ~0.5 to 3 seconds and is recognized based on
~5 to 20 successive deflections of the human EEG signal
(Fig. 1A). These deflections reach a maximum at the

middle of the spindle event, gradually increasing before
(“waxing”) and decreasing thereafter (“waning”), thence
the name “spindles” (Fig. 1A). Within the consolidated
NREM sleep epochs lasting ~90 minutes in humans,
spindles are but brief oscillatory events that recur maximally a few times per minute.
The neural mechanisms of spindle generation have
been studied for decades in different mammalian species,
initially via electrophysiological and computational
methods, later in combination with molecular and imaging approaches. A surge of interest in spindles sparked in
the past years in the context of sleep’s implication in
learning and memory formation (Fogel and Smith 2011;
Rasch and Born 2013). In humans, spindles are now
divided into two types that have different frequencies,
topographic distributions, and putative functional roles,
as indicated by noninvasive scalp EEG recordings and
functional imaging techniques (Fogel and Smith 2011;
Rasch and Born 2013).

1

Department of Fundamental Neurosciences, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland
Corresponding Author:
Anita Lüthi, Department of Fundamental Neurosciences, University of
Lausanne, Rue du Bugnon 9, CH-1005 Lausanne, Switzerland.
Email: anita.luthi@unil.ch

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

244	

The Neuroscientist 20(3)

Figure 1.  Sleep spindles and spindle-like rhythms are documented at multiple levels of neuronal circuitry analysis. (A) Electroencephalographic recording of spindles from a sleeping human subject from two corresponding sites on primary somatosensory
cortex (C3-A2, C4-A1). Note the regular appearance of sleep spindles, evident as grouped electroencephalographic deflections
occurring at higher frequencies than background (*). K-complexes intertwined with sleep spindles are marked by #. The spindle
labeled with ** is expanded on the right to illustrate the waxing and waning waveform. Traces were kindly provided by Dr.
R. Heinzer, Cantonal Hospital of the University of Lausanne, Switzerland. (B) Local field potential recordings from layer 5 of
primary somatosensory (S1) and auditory (A1) areas in an adult C57Bl/6J mouse during non–rapid eye movement (NREM)
sleep. Same labeling for *, ** and # as in (A). Spindles were detected based on band-pass filtering of the traces between 10
and 15 Hz (bottom trace on the right). Traces were kindly provided by Dr. L. Fernandez, University of Lausanne, Switzerland.
(C) Spontaneous rhythmic multiunit discharges in a mouse brain slice containing thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) and adjacent
ventrobasal thalamic complex. Waxing and waning waveform of each grouped discharge is apparent. Expanded portion is taken
from the area labeled with a small black bar and shown to the right. (D) Intracellular recording of a thalamocortical (TC)
neuron engaged in spindle-like rhythms in a ferret slice containing the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus and
the adjacent perigeniculate nucleus, a carnivore equivalent of the visual TRN (for further information, see Steriade and others
1993). Note rhythmic occurrence of inhibitory postsynaptic potentials that are occasionally eliciting rebound burst discharge.
Black bar illustrates portion of the trace that is expanded to the right. Time scale in (D) applies for (A)-(C). (E) Ca2+ imaging
of proximal dendrites of a TRN cell as it generates repeated burst discharge elicited through somatic current injection. Images
were acquired at the time of discharge indicated by vertical lines. Imaging was carried out as described in Cueni and others
(2008). Note the marked increase in Ca2+ levels throughout the imaged dendritic portion and its almost complete decay during
the interburst phase.

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

245

Lüthi	

Where Do Spindles Come From?
The earliest reports on spindles go along with the very
first attempts to monitor brain electricity across the skull
using galvanometers (Box 1). Since then, the thalamus
has moved to center stage as the site of origin of spindle
wave generation. The electrical events underlying spindle
rhythmicity, and their spread throughout the thalamocortical (TC) system, are now documented at the level of
EEG and of local field potential recordings in the anesthetized and sleeping brain, from rodent, to carnivore, to
primate, to human (Fig. 1A and B). Moreover, spindlerelated rhythms can be reproduced in brain slices from
ferrets and rodents and have been followed from multiunit activity, to single cell discharge, to the flux of specific ions across the membrane (Fig. 1C-E).
There are three successive phases of spindles that are
comparable between species and that I review sequentially here: (1) the initiation of spindle generation, (2)
spindle pacemaking and synchronization, and (3) spindle
termination. Many important mechanistic aspects of spindle generation have been previously reviewed in detail
(Beenhakker and Huguenard 2009; McCormick and Bal
1997; Timofeev and others 2012). I will present wellestablished knowledge briefly referencing key review
articles, while concentrating on recent insights in more
detail. I will highlight in particular that spindles occur in
temporal coordination with other sleep rhythms, and are
increasingly understood as just one element in what
appears to be a large-scale grouping of brain rhythms
throughout the TC and the hippocampal system.

The Thalamic Reticular Nucleus
The first electrophysiological recordings of TC neurons,
the principal excitatory neurons of thalamic nuclei projecting to cortex, indicated that rhythmic inhibitory synaptic potentials always occurred in phase with spindle
wave generation (Purpura 1968). Andersen and Andersson
(1968) postulated a set of widely disseminated inhibitory
distributor neurons in thalamus to explain this coordinated inhibition. Based on lesion experiments, Steriade
and colleagues realized that, rather than a diffusely distributed circuit, a well-defined nucleus encircling the
thalamus, the thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN), generates this inhibition and thereby acts as a spindle pacemaker (reviewed in Fuentealba and Steriade 2005). The
TRN forms a thin envelope, ~1 mm in diameter in
humans, around most of the principal thalamic nuclei and
covers these like an umbrella along their frontal–caudal
extent. TRN cells throughout mammalian species appear
uniform in that they all express the neurotransmitter
GABA, they possess long and thin dendrites running in

Box 1.
The historical origins of sleep spindle research. The
German medical doctor Hans Berger (1873-1941), working
as a psychiatrist in Jena, had in mind to identify measurable
parameters about the brain’s psychical energy and about
mental telepathy. He initially experimented on human
patients with skull defects to measure brain volume, pulsations of intracranial blood flow, and intracranial temperature.
Around 1900, he turned to his first recording of the electrical activity of the brain, but then suspended these efforts
because of the poor data quality, clinical and academic obligations, and medical service during World War I. He picked
up his scientific work in the 1920s, and, through a decadelong painstaking improvement of galvanometric recordings
from the human brain, he came up with the first clear
recordings of rhythmic brain activities. He noted in particular the rhythmic appearance of brief oscillatory events in the
10-Hz range, which he called alpha waves, and which he
thought were representing some form of mental activity,
whereas the faster beta waves (15-20 Hz) represented the
brain’s metabolic state (Berger 1933). In the last decade of
his life, great skepticism was brought against his work and
the significance of Berger’s “Elektrenkephalogramm” was
not recognized until researchers such as Sir Adrian, Jaspers,
and Bremer reproduced his findings and further developed
techniques and animal preparations to record brain electrical activity. Their studies sparked discussions about the electrical signals generating and the cellular mechanisms
underlying the observed rhythms. Spindle waves soon
became the focus of these discussions when Adrian noted
that rhythmic activity observed in cortex during anesthesia
could be recorded in the white matter, from the cut end of
fibers from thalamus to cortex (Adrian 1941).The 1950s and
1960s brought landmark developments within the field of
thalamic function. Moruzzi and Magoun (1949) identified the
brainstem reticular activating system as a main wake-promoting structure. Moreover, intracellular recordings from
thalamic neurons revealed that these neurons experience
prolonged rhythmic inhibitory synaptic events in phase with
the oscillatory periods (Purpura 1968), originating from an
intrathalamic source (Andersen and Andersson 1968). The
leading researcher at the end of 1900s was Mircea Steriade,
who, from the 1980s on, demonstrated that thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) was the pacemaker for sleep spindles and
responsible for generating rhythmic inhibitory synaptic
potentials throughout principal thalamic nuclei (reviewed in
Fuentealba and Steriade 2005). His work on the intact brain
found even greater acclaim when spindle rhythms could be
reproduced in brain slice preparations containing the TRN,
further confirming that they arose from a localized pacemaker element within the brain (reviewed in Steriade and
others 1993).

parallel to the TRN borders, and most of them express the
Ca2+-binding protein parvalbumin; nevertheless, cells in
TRN probably form functionally heterogeneous classes

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

246	

The Neuroscientist 20(3)

that go along with variable soma size, discharge properties, dendritic appendages, and expression of other Ca2+binding proteins (Fig. 2) (Pinault 2004; Scheibel and
Scheibel 1966). The TRN is subdivided into several, partially overlapping sensory sectors that receive topographically organized sensory information from visual,
auditory, somatosensory, gustatory, visceral, motor, and
limbic circuits (Pinault 2004; Zikopoulos and Barbas
2007). The TRN does not project to cortex, whereas it is
strongly innervated by descending cortical input arising
in deep layer 6 from corresponding first-order sensory
areas, and, at least in monkey, from prefrontal cortex that
may overlap several sensory domains. The TRN cells target most principal thalamic nuclei in all species and synapse onto excitatory TC cells (reviewed in Fuentealba
and Steriade 2005; Pinault 2004). Axonal projections
arborize extensively and penetrate deeply into principal
thalamus, crossing several nuclei in horizontal dorsal–
caudal projections (Scheibel and Scheibel 1966) and
innervating numerous TC neurons through multiple,
closely spaced (<10 µm) presynaptic boutons
(Wanaverbecq and others 2008). By providing
GABAergic inhibitory feedback to specific and nonspecific thalamus, the TRN controls communication between
thalamic nuclei and across TC loops. By being highly
responsive to cortical feedback from sensory and higher
cortical areas, the TRN shapes multiple aspects of sensory transmission, ranging from receptive field organization up to anticipation and attentional modulation of
sensory perception (reviewed in Pinault 2004;
Vukadinovic 2011).
What is the current understanding of how the TRN
network acts as a pacemaker for spindles? Since the first
unit recordings from TRN cells in sleeping cats, it became
clear that the TRN is a very active brain nucleus that discharges at typically at least ~20 Hz throughout all vigilance states, but the exact temporal pattern of discharge
varies (Mukhametov and others 1970). Thalamic neurons, and TRN cells in particular, undergo substantial
changes in resting membrane potentials according to the
state of vigilance of the brain (reviewed in McCormick
and Bal 1997). When the activity in wake-promoting
structures ceases, as is the case at sleep onset (Saper and
others 2010), depolarizing effects of monoaminergic neurotransmitters on TRN are withdrawn and the resting
membrane potentials falls by 10 to 12 mV from levels
approximately −50 to less than −60 mV. Whereas regularly timed action potential discharge is elicited from
depolarized resting membrane potentials (greater than
−55 mV), TRN cells switch to a drastically different discharge mode once they are resting at approximately −65
mV or at more hyperpolarized levels. This is because
membrane hyperpolarization overlaps with the activation

range of a voltage-gated Ca2+ channel, also called lowthreshold Ca2+ channel or T-channel (reviewed in
Huguenard 1996). T-channels are encoded by a family of
3 genes, CaV3.1, CaV3.2, and CaV3.3, of which the latter
two are expressed in TRN (Astori and others 2011). As
their name says, these channels possess a low activation
threshold (approximately −60 mV) and provoke triangular-shaped Ca2+ spikes that rapidly, yet transiently, depolarize the neuron to threshold for Na+ action potentials
(Huguenard 1996). Action potentials riding on top of
these Ca2+ spikes are then grouped in high-frequency
bursts of several hundred Hz that are key to TRN’s capacities to pacemake spindles.

The Initiation of Sleep Spindles
Cells in TRN undoubtedly belong to the most dedicated
burst-generating neurons in the brain, as exemplified by
the combination of powerful cellular and synaptic specifications (Fig. 2). The most prevalent T-channel subtype
of the TRN cells is the CaV3.3 channel that is expressed at
high densities along TRN dendrites and that makes up for
~70% of somatically recorded current, with the remaining current being generated by CaV3.2 channels (Astori
and others 2011). T-channel expression occurs in a gradient that increases with increasing somatodendritic distance and that reaches maximum levels ~100 µm from the
soma, as indicated through Ca2+ imaging (Crandall and
others 2010). At more distal sites (>125 µm), the large
amount of T-channels boosts the burst propensity of these
dendritic compartments. A burst generated therein propagates to the soma and ensures a massive depolarizing
drive, explaining the robust Ca2+ spike generated in TRN
somas that initiates bursts of action potential discharge in
TRN axons (Destexhe and others 1996). Voltage-gated
Ca2+ channels of the R-type (Zaman and others 2011) and
rapid K+ channels of the KV3 gene family (Espinosa and
others 2008) further sustain the rhythmic burst discharge
mechanism.
What are the synaptic mechanisms triggering burst discharge? Low-threshold spikes are easily initiated in distal
dendritic compartments through glutamatergic stimuli,
independently of the somatic membrane polarization
(Crandall and others 2010). At these sites, corticothalamic
projections predominate and provide one of the most
important initial triggers for TRN bursting through the
generation of excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs)
(Fig. 3A) (reviewed in Fuentealba and Steriade 2005).
Cortico-TRN synapses are the most abundant excitatory
afferents onto TRN cells; these synapses have high levels of α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic
acid (AMPA)–type ionotropic glutamate receptors at their
postsynaptic sites and the pronounced frequency

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

247

Lüthi	

Figure 2.  Morphological, ionic, and synaptic properties of thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) cells that contribute to vigorous
burst discharge. Reconstructed rat TRN cell labeled with neurobiotin during a juxtacellular recording (for details, see Pinault
2004 and references therein). Note the multiple thin dendrites emerging from the soma, some of which branch extensively
and form hairy appendages. The subcellular distribution is indicated for T-channels (orange-brown gradient, with darker colors
indicating greater expression levels) and for small-conductance type 2 (SK2) channels (green). SK2 channel expression was
demonstrated up to ~100 µm from the soma. Single dendrites were chosen to illustrate T- and SK2 channel distribution in
color code. Mechanisms of burst control involving high-voltage-activated Ca2+ channels, Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release (CICR) and
Ca2+-activated cation channels were described at the somatic level. The axon, emerging from a primary dendrite, expresses
high levels of Na+ channels (red). Synaptic afferents for which their subcellular localization is known are positioned accordingly.
Excitatory afferents are labeled with a circle, inhibitory afferents with a line. Cholinergic afferents mediate both excitation and
inhibition. Insets show a single burst and repetitive burst discharge (for details, see Pinault 2004 and references therein). ACh
= acetylcholine; TC = thalamocortical; CT = corticothalamic. Reconstructed cell and electrophysiological traces were kindly
provided by Dr. D. Pinault, INSERM, University of Strasbourg, France.

facilitation of the synapses imposes a powerful excitatory
drive (reviewed in Fuentealba and Steriade 2005). The
dominant role of cortico-TRN projections in triggering

burst discharge is important for the temporal coordination
of spindles with other sleep rhythms (see also subsection
“The Temporal Organization of Spindles”). Additionally,

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

248	

The Neuroscientist 20(3)

Figure 3.  T-channel-dependent mechanisms of spindle initiation, synchronization and termination. (A-C) Schematic drawings
of membrane portions from thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) and thalamocortical (TC) cells with color-coded CaV3 channels
(orange-yellow), small-conductance type 2 (SK2) channels (green), hyperpolarization-activated cation-nonselective (HCN)
channels (blue) and cation channels (grey) and associated mechanisms of Ca2+ signaling. Na+ channels are not represented.
Colored circles and associated color clouds indicate ion flow through channels. Yellow, Ca2+; Green K+; Blue Na+. Membrane
voltage traces indicate the electrophysiological events associated to these schemes. Traces are from recordings in mouse
thalamic slices and were kindly provided by Dr. S. Astori, University of Lausanne, Switzerland. (A) Initiation of spindles occurs
through recruitment of burst discharge via cortical excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs). (B) Spindle synchronization is
mediated via reciprocal synaptic interactions between TRN and TC cells through burst inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs),
rebound burst generation in TC cells, and TC–TRN EPSPs. Repetitive burst discharge in TRN cells occurs through CaV3.3–SK2
channel interplay. (C) Termination of spindles occurs through multiple mechanisms involving Ca2+-mediated alterations of TRN
and TC cell excitability. (Top) TRN cells undergo a dampening of burst discharge through (left) somatic activation of cation
channels (via activation of Ca2+ channels and Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release through ryanodine receptors) and through (right)
dendritic sequestration of Ca2+ via sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPases (SERCAs), limiting SK2 channel activation.
(Bottom) TC cells generate a membrane after depolarization (arrow) through repetitive burst IPSPs, Ca2+-mediated activation of
adenylate cyclases and consequent up-regulation of HCN channels.

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

249

Lüthi	
several modulatory synaptic afferents arising in wakepromoting brain areas impinge onto TRN cells that could
regulate spindle occurrence at periods of NREM sleep termination (Fig. 2) (see, e.g., Sun and others 2013).
Recently, light-induced activation of channelrhodopsin-2 expressed in mouse TRN cells was used to induce
putative burst discharge, and such stimuli were occasionally followed by spindle-like rhythms in the EEG during
NREM sleep states (Halassa and others 2011; Kim and
others 2012). This shows directly that TRN bursts can
drive EEG sleep spindles.
Thalamic reticular nucleus cells provide a strong
inhibitory output to TC cells via the generation of burst
inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (burst IPSPs) (Fig.
3B) that involve synaptic GABAA receptors (reviewed
in Beenhakker and Huguenard 2009; McCormick and
Bal 1997) and, through spillover of GABA, extrasynaptically located GABAA receptors (Fig. 3B) (Rovó and
others 2012) Additionally, extrasynaptic GABAB receptors activated during bursts contribute a sizeable, slow
component of the burst-mediated hyperpolarization
(reviewed in Beenhakker and Huguenard 2009). Widely
used sedative–hypnotic agents for insomnia allosterically strengthen GABAA receptor function and typically boost σ power in the NREM sleep EEG, consistent
with the important role of these receptors in spindlegenerating networks (reviewed in Winsky-Sommerer
2009).

sequences of bursts (Fig. 3B), further sustaining rhythmic
inhibition of TC cells.
When portions of the cortex are lesioned, the occurrence and synchrony of spindles in thalamus is greatly
reduced in the remaining areas (reviewed in Steriade
2006). To conceptualize this cortical control of spindles,
it is important to remember that once excited, TRN cells
will produce widespread recruitment of TC cells not only
in the topographically corresponding section but also in
nonspecific thalamic areas. As also demonstrated in computational models (Bonjean and others 2011), these will
in turn excite broad cortical areas.
Very important for the controlled buildup of spindle
synchronization are the reciprocal inhibitory interactions
between TRN cells that are mediated through slowly
deactivating GABAA receptors. These limit the participation of neighboring TRN cells in synchronized discharge
through shunting and burst inhibition (reviewed in
Beenhakker and Huguenard 2009). Additionally, TRN
cells are assembled in clusters with juxtaposed cell bodies that are connected through electrical synapses built by
connexin36-containing gap junctions (reviewed in
Cruikshank and others 2005). Their low-pass filter characteristics allow the low-threshold spikes to spread well
and augment synchronized burst propensity in coupled
cells.

The Pacemaking and Synchronization of
Spindles

Electroencephalographic spindle waves are scalp reflections of synaptic currents generated by cortical neurons.
How do intrathalamic network reverberations produce
EEG spindle waves? Thalamocortical cell axons from
specific and nonspecific nuclei project to cortical recipient areas, making the majority of their synapses in layers
4 and 5 of sensory cortices, respectively, with additional
projections to supra- and infragranular layers (Meyer and
others 2010). When many TC cells burst simultaneously,
strong and rhythmic feedforward excitatory volleys are
observed in both sensory and prefrontal cortices that
entrain ~30% of pyramidal and ~80% of fast-spiking
interneurons into rhythmic discharges (Peyrache and others 2011). Surprisingly, rhythmic activity is seen with
only millisecond delays in upper cortical layers, indicating that intracortical circuitry is entrained, and further
amplifies, the thalamically imposed rhythm (Kandel and
Buzsáki 1997). The initial waxing phase of EEG spindles
is likely related to this accruing participation of larger
cortical cell populations into the rhythms.

Through their divergent projections, single TRN cells
inhibit multiple TC cells, thereby driving these to
rebound burst discharge (Fig. 3B). In return, EPSPs generated at TC–TRN synapses reexcite TRN cells. In a
back-and-forth excitation and inhibition cycle, TRN and
TC neuron pools interact like two ping-pong players and
increasingly recruit cells into the synchronized discharge
(reviewed in Beenhakker and Huguenard 2009;
McCormick and Bal 1997).
In TRN dendrites, T-channels are integrated in cooperative ionic assemblies that render burst generation
repetitive. T-channel activation causes a rapid and homogeneous accumulation of Ca2+ in the interior of TRN dendrites to levels of at least a few micromolar (Fig. 1E)
(Crandall and others 2010; Cueni and others 2008). These
Ca2+ levels are high enough to activate Ca2+-dependent
small-conductance type 2 (SK2) K+ channels that are
found throughout large portions of proximal TRN dendrites. Low-threshold Ca2+ spikes are thus invariably followed by SK2-channel-mediated afterhyperpolarizations
(Fig. 3B) (Cueni and others 2008). Through T-channel–
SK2-channel interplay, TRN cells generate repetitive

The Propagation of Spindles to Cortical Areas

The Termination of Spindles
Several intrinsic and synaptic mechanisms exist in TRN
cells that dampen rhythmic burst discharge. Great

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

250	

The Neuroscientist 20(3)

importance has been attributed to lateral inhibition
between TRN cells that is mediated by GABAergic inhibition, but probably also by peptidergic modulation,
which ensure that bursting TRN cells limit the participation of their neighbors in synchronized discharge
(reviewed in Beenhakker and Huguenard 2009).
Inhibitory inputs also arise from basal ganglia, substantia
nigra, and pretectal areas (reviewed in Zikopoulos and
Barbas 2007). Dendrites of TRN cells intertwine into
small bundles and form dendrodendritic synapses that are
thought to act as a brake, inhibiting neighboring neurons
and destabilizing network synchrony (Pinault 2004).
Other mechanisms of termination are found in intrinsic
ionic mechanisms that reduce burst propensity in both
TRN and TC cells as a result of repetitive burst discharge
and accumulated Ca2+ entry through T-channels (Fig.
3C). In TC cells, Ca2+-sensitive adenylate cyclases activate gradually once repetitive rebound spikes occur, leading to the synthesis of cAMP and the activation of the
hyperpolarization-activated cation-nonselective (HCN)
channels (Lüthi and McCormick 1999). This depolarization reduces the excitability of TC neurons, contributing
to the breakdown of TC–TRN reverberations. In TRN
cells, Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release and associated cation
channel activation at somatic levels, and sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA)–mediated sequestration of Ca2+ (Cueni and others 2008) and recruitment
of Na+-dependent K+ channels (reviewed in Coulon and
others 2012) in dendrites, attenuate TRN burst firing.
Finally, asynchronous cortical synaptic activity also contributes to spindle termination (Bonjean and others 2011).

of cortex are also induced in TC and TRN neurons (Crunelli
and Hughes 2010). The strong feedback control, combined
with widespread TC projections, ensures spatially coherent
spreading of spindling over cortical territories (reviewed in
Steriade 2006). The cortical control of spindles explains
their link to EEG slow waves, resulting in spike-like waveforms called K-complexes in humans (Fig. 1A). However,
spindles also occur independently of slow rhythms, occasionally in localized cortical regions (Nir and others 2011).
In rodents, spindle waves appear throughout NREM sleep
(Fig. 1B) (Vyazovskiy and others 2004), predominantly at
periods of NREM sleep termination when low-frequency δ
power weakens. Well documented is the surge of σ power
(10-15 Hz) ~30 seconds before NREM–REM sleep transitions that depends on burst discharge in TRN (Astori and
others 2011; Wimmer and others 2012).
Interestingly, spindles are also temporally associated
with hippocampal activity. High-frequency (100-300 Hz)
sharp-wave ripples (SPWRs) are found in hippocampus
during quiet wakefulness and NREM sleep and represent
a reactivation of firing patterns found during exploration,
probably contributing to the formation of memory traces
(reviewed in Girardeau and Zugaro 2011). Close temporal associations exist between hippocampal SPWRs and
cortical spindles mostly in prefrontal but also in sensory
areas in rats and humans (reviewed in Rasch and Born
2013). Such observations point to a widely coordinated
synchronization of major brain memory systems and TC
rhythms, and embed spindles in the transfer of newly
acquired hippocampal memory traces to cortex for longterm storage.

The Temporal Organization of Spindles

Human Sleep Spindles

Spindles appear during NREM sleep in temporal coherence with several sleep rhythms that emerge from distinct
brain areas (reviewed in Steriade 2006). A dominant role in
the temporal organization of sleep spindles is played by the
cortical “slow waves” that underlie the low-frequency
power (<1 Hz) of the NREM sleep EEG. Slow waves arise
from substantial (>10 mV), rapid and highly synchronized
fluctuations of the membrane potential of cortical neurons
between two states, a depolarized “up” state (greater than
−60 mV) and a hyperpolarized “down” (less than −70 mV)
state (reviewed in Steriade 2006; Timofeev and others
2012). The “up” state is accompanied by wake-like repetitive action potential firing in cortical neurons across all
layers, creating a strong excitatory feedback via corticoTRN synapses (Sanchez-Vives and McCormick 2000).
Cortical waves thus impose periodically recurring excitation onto TRN and TC cells, thereby triggering intrathalamic network reverberations. Through prolonged
excitation during “up” states, slow rhythms matching those

Two different types of spindles were already reported in
early stages of EEG recordings from humans (reviewed in
Rasch and Born 2013). The slower spindles with a frequency ~12 Hz predominate in frontal cortical areas,
whereas the faster ones ~14 Hz are found in parietal zones.
Presurgical depth EEG recordings from epileptic patients
suggest a sharp border between slow and fast spindles in
the supplementary motor area (Andrillon and others 2011),
whereas other experimenters observed more gradual frequency changes along the rostro-caudal axis (Peter-Derex
and others 2012). The origin of fast and slow spindles is
not clarified, but is relevant as fast and slow spindles differentially engaged in learning-related brain activity
(Mölle and others 2011). Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) showed that both spindle types largely, but
not completely, shared the thalamic areas activated
(Schabus and others 2007). There were also common activation patterns in anterior cingulate cortex, insula and
superior temporal gyrus. However, fast spindles overall

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

251

Lüthi	
showed a broader cortical activation pattern, notably in
sensori-motor and hippocampal areas. Interestingly, spindle activity during stage N2 of NREM sleep correlated
with neuronal activation in hippocampus, suggesting that
TC oscillations drive hippocampus (Andrade and others
2011; Peter-Derex and others 2012).

What Do Spindles Do?

sleep repeatedly opens time windows for sensory stimuli to
penetrate into cortex. Considering that spindles often occur
during cortical up states, it is possible that they represent
cortically triggered efforts to enhance sensory shutdown
after a brief period of heightened responsiveness.
Conversely, properly timed auditory stimuli can enhance
slow fluctuations in the cortex as they probably boost cortical activity during up states (Ngo and others 2013).

Sensory Transmission

Synaptic Plasticity and Memory

The definition of sleep states involves a reduced responsiveness to sensory inputs. As the TC system is the major
recipient of sensory afferents, changes in its electrical
activity will affect the throughput of sensory stimuli.
Early in vivo studies, some of which carried out by the
Nobel Prize winner David Hubel, demonstrated that the
fidelity of retinogeniculate information transfer varied
with the state of arousal, and is in particular degraded
during periods of drowsiness and sleep (Livingstone and
Hubel 1981), when TC neurons are hyperpolarized and
preferentially discharge in bursts rather than in linearly
coding tonic trains of action potentials (reviewed in
McCormick and Bal 1997).
Spindles are particularly efficient in vetoing sensory
activation of the cortex and are key elements in the
reduced sensory responsiveness during sleep. For example, it is harder to wake somebody up while the brain generates spindles than when it does not do so (Yamadori
1971). Event-related potentials, which are EEG deflections in response to sensory stimuli, are altered in shape
during NREM sleep, but do so more extensively when
elicited during a spindle (Cote and others 2000). A recent
imaging study looking at auditory cortex activation during sounds showed that activation was essentially nil during spindles, but remained substantial during spindle-free
NREM sleep (Fig. 4) (Dang-Vu and others 2011; Schabus
and others 2012). The dominant recruitment of inhibition
throughout cortical layers plausibly contributes to the
lack of cortical response (Peyrache and others 2011). A
protective role of sleep spindles was directly demonstrated in mice in which spindle power at periods of exit
from NREM sleep was intensified through genetic modification of TRN bursting (Wimmer and others 2012).
These animals showed a higher acoustic arousal threshold when exposed to incremental white noise, suggesting
that sleep spindles retard the transition from NREM sleep
to waking.
Why would the brain use short spindle events to protect
itself from arousal? Sensory disconnection during sleep
varies constantly, with recurring periods of sensory
shutdown and of weakened, but still significant responsiveness closer to the waking state. It seems that NREM

Via the excitation imposed by TC afferents onto cortex,
spindles induce coordinated firing in cortical circuits. Across
cortical layers, single action potentials occur time-locked to
the spindle rhythm, as monitored in local field potential
recordings (Contreras and others 1997), priming connected
neurons for spike timing–dependent forms of plasticity.
Additionally, groups of action potentials discharges at >100
Hz in cortical neurons may modify synaptic strength in a
non-Hebbian form of plasticity, that is, independently of the
temporal correlation between pre- and postsynaptic activity.
For example, burst-like discharge in cortical layer 5 neurons
induces a long-term depression of excitatory synapses
formed by supragranular afferents and a strengthening of
somatic inhibitory inputs (Birtoli and Ulrich 2004; Kurotani
and others 2008).
Spindle-related spike trains recorded in anesthetized
cat were applied in cellular studies in rat cortical brain
slices to mimic temporally correlated pre- and postsynaptic activity thought to occur during spindles (Rosanova
and Ulrich 2005). As a result, a long-term potentiation
(LTP) at excitatory connections between layer 2/3 and
layer 5 was observed (Fig. 5A). Interestingly, the detailed
sequence of interspike interval in the spindle train mattered, as a random shuffling of these or using mean frequency rates (30 Hz) were inferior in inducing LTP. Aside
from cortex, recent studies have unraveled that rhythmic
bursting in TRN cells induces LTP at TC–TRN synapses
(Astori and Lüthi 2013). Spindle rhythms thus drive cortical synchronized discharge and associated long-term synaptic strengthening and override a global down-regulation
of synapses during low-frequency rhythms in cortex.
The synaptic potentiation observed by spindles links
to repeated observations that spindles correlate with
memory formation and learning capacity in humans.
Declarative memory tasks involving cued recall of word
pairs went along with increased spindle density (in number of events per 30 seconds) during the first period of
N2 NREM sleep, without any changes in sleep structure
or other frequency bands (Gais and others 2002; Schabus
and others 2004). Spindle density increased locally
within brain areas implicated in learning, as documented
in other training tasks (Fig. 5B) (Johnson and others

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

252	

The Neuroscientist 20(3)

Figure 4.  Annihilation of auditory cortex activation during spindle-containing, but not during spindle-free epochs of non–rapid
eye movement (NREM) sleep. (A) Schematic of experimental design. Human electroencephalographic trace of NREM sleep with
spindle-free and spindle-containing episodes. Brief auditory stimuli (300 ms, 400 Hz) were applied at time points indicated by blue
squares. Electroencephalographic trace was provided by Dr. R. Heinzer, Cantonal University Hospital of Lausanne, Switzerland. (B)
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of responses to auditory stimuli during three electroencephalographically defined
states (indicated above the images). Yellow voxels indicate brain areas activated in response to the stimulus. During waking, clear
responses are evoked in auditory cortex (top) and in brainstem and collicular areas (bottom) involved in sound detection. During
spindle-free NREM sleep, similar brain areas are activated; see Dang-Vu and others (2011) for explanations as to the difference in
activation patterns between waking and spindle-free NREM sleep. During spindle-containing NREM sleep epochs, no fMRI signals
are detectable in cortex and brainstem. Red arrows highlight small activation of inferior collicular areas (enlarged in inset). X and Y
refer to brain coordinates used for fMRI. Picture adapted from Dang-Vu and others (2011), with permission.

2012). The increase in spindle density correlated linearly
with the performance improvement. Spindle density also
correlates positively with learning capacity and intelligence measures (Fig. 5C). Links between spindles and
memory formation are now documented for rodents
exposed to associative learning (Eschenko and others
2006; Mölle and others 2009) and for more sophisticated
aspects of the learning process in humans (reviewed in
Rasch and Born 2013).

How could changes in spindle parameters, such as
their intensity/amplitude or their frequency/occurrence,
facilitate learning? A combined EEG and fMRI study
on associative visual memory found that, during
postlearning sleep, the amplitude of individual spindles
correlated with neuronal activation in both hippocampus and in higher visual areas (Bergmann and others
2012). This finding is consistent with observations on
enhanced temporal coupling between cortical slow

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

253

Lüthi	

Figure 5.  Sleep spindles and their relation to synaptic plasticity, memory, and intelligence. (A) Application of spindle-like
rhythmic action potential trains in rat somatosensory cortical brain slices induces long-term potentiation. (Left) Stimulation
train applied to presynaptic afferents (Pre, upper electrode) and to postsynaptic cells (Post, lower electrode) to induce joint
pre- and postsynaptic activity. The stimulation protocol was repeated 30 times at 0.6 Hz. Right, sample excitatory postsynaptic
potentials (EPSPs) before (dotted line) and >30 min after (solid line) conditioning protocols. Adapted from Rosanova and Ulrich
2005, with permission. (B) High-resolution electroencephalographic (EEG) monitoring of posttraining spindle rates in human
subjects exposed to a brain–computer interface task. Warm and cold colors indicate percentage increases and decreases in
spindle rates, respectively, relative to the day preceding training. White circle indicates the position of the task electrode used
for brain–computer interfacing. Note local increases in spindle density consistent with the site of learning. Gray colors indicate
no change. Adapted with permission from Johnson and others (2012). (C) Linear correlation between total number of spindles
measured at sites C3 and C4. Spindles were included in the count if the intraspindle frequency was 12 to16 Hz, if the duration
was >0.5 seconds, and the amplitude reached 10 mV. Every data point represents one participant. Correlation coefficient was
0.75. Adapted from Fogel and others (2007).

oscillations, spindles, and hippocampal ripples after
learning (Mölle and others 2009). However, in naturally sleeping rats, prefrontal cortex responded more
weakly to hippocampal SPWRs during spindle epochs
than during spindle-free periods (Peyrache and others
2011), leaving open whether spindle-related proplastic
effects are related to spindle-ripple coupling. It is also
important to note that not only spindles but slow wave
intensity also correlates with declarative learning
(Rasch and Born 2013), indicating that sleep-related
learning is a multicomponent process with several sleep
rhythms involved.

Neuronal Development
Spindles are accompanied by rhythmic fluctuations of
intracellular signaling compounds. In TRN cells, Ca2+ concentrations increase during every burst discharge in large
portions of dendrites and Ca2+ is sequestered through
SERCAs into the endoplasmic reticulum (Fig. 1E, Fig. 3C).
Luminal Ca2+ levels regulate major endoplasmic reticulum
functions in cell physiology, including gene transcription
and protein synthesis. T-channel-mediated Ca2+ accumulation in the endoplasmic reticulum may hence drive transcriptional activity specifically during spindle rhythmicity.

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

254	

The Neuroscientist 20(3)

Furthermore, in TC cells, rhythmic low-threshold bursts
lead to waves of cAMP synthesis through activation of
Ca2+-sensitive adenylate cyclases (Fig. 3C) (Lüthi and
McCormick 1999), known to be important for synapse
specification (Gorbunova and Spitzer 2002). Interestingly,
first signs of organized electrical activity in the developing
brain of rodents and humans occur as spindle-like, 10-Hz
rhythms in association with spontaneous muscle twitches in
limbs (reviewed in Hanganu-Opatz 2010). It is proposed
that these early brain rhythms act as a template for cortical
map organization, but whether spindle-associated Ca2+ and
cAMP signals are relevant for sensory circuit formation
remains open. Spindle-mediated fluctuations in intracellular signaling perhaps play a role throughout adulthood by
maintaining and shaping TC connectivity in the mature
brain in response to ongoing sensory activity and learning.

Conclusions and Perspectives
Spindles were the first EEG rhythm reported and the first
network oscillation for which a cellular mechanism was
elucidated. These oscillations continue to exemplify the
neuronal structure and significance of rhythms for the
brain, as indicated by the makeup of oscillatory units, the
design of circuits engaging in successive synchronization
and desynchronization and their conditioned recruitment
by other brain areas. Spindle rhythmogenesis is based on
an elaborated cooperation between ionic and synaptic
mechanisms in the pacemaker circuits. Knowledge about
these is relevant in the continued search of specific drug
targets that could improve treatment of sleep disorders.
Spindles separate sleep into distinct phases of sensory
accessibility, enabling periods of almost complete annihilation of sensory throughput with periods in which sensory information does reach the cortex. At the same time,
spindles enable epochs of heightened plasticity that fall
together with the emergence of hippocampal rhythms.
Therefore, do spindles promote sensory protection to
ensure the internal processing of information? Do spindles facilitate the association between hippocampal and
cortical activity that allows the purported transfer from
short-term to long-term memory sites? How does such a
function correlate with the dominant recruitment of inhibition in cortex by spindles? From all we can see today,
spindles seem designed to unify the brain’s diverse structures into a single major processing center, yet more analysis is required to link their impact on cortical units and
on hippocampal–cortical coordination.
First efforts to modify spindles specifically are underway. Chronic manipulations, such as those possible with
genetic interference (Astori and others 2011; Wimmer and
others 2012), will determine their role in sleep architecture
and TC connectivity. Acute modification (Halassa and
others 2011) could be envisaged as a way to test their

implication in learning processes, for example, by combining associative learning in rodents with optogenetic manipulation of spindle occurrence during postlearning sleep.
These possibilities currently remain overflown with
questions to be resolved experimentally: Do optogenetic
stimuli come close to cortically mediated initiation of
thalamic pacemakers? How should optogenetically elicited spindles be timed relative to the occurrence of other
rhythms? Is it sufficient to modify spindle occurrence
independently of other rhythms to facilitate learning?
What will be the impact of global versus modality-specific TRN stimulation?
Decreased spindle activity has been presented as a
hallmark in schizophrenia (Ferrarelli and others 2010),
and developmental models of schizophrenia in rat
revealed aberrant timing of spindles relative to cortical
and hippocampal rhythms (Phillips and others 2012).
Such sleep disturbances fit well with the idea that abnormal perceptions in schizophrenia are due to impaired corticothalamic communication (Vukadinovic 2011). Novel
links between spindles and neurological disease may ultimately prompt therapeutic approaches involving directed
manipulation of sleep rhythms.
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Drs. S. Astori, L. Fernandez, R. Heinzer and D.
Pinault for providing original datasets for Figures 1-4 and to all
lab members for their constructive input on the article. I thank
Drs. J.C. Brumberg, D. Pinault, and D. Ulrich for their insightful comments on the text. Experimental work presented here
was supported by grants from the Swiss National Science
Foundation, the Synapsis Foundation, SciEx.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Swiss National Science Foundation No. 3100A0-129810;
SciEx; Synapsis Foundation; Etat de Vaud.

References
Adrian ED. 1941. Afferent discharges to the cerebral cortex
from peripheral sense organs. J Physiol 100(2):159–91.
Andersen P, Andersson SA, editors. 1968. Physiological
basis of the alpha rhythm: New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts.
Andrade KC, Spoormaker VI, Dresler M, Wehrle R, Holsboer
F, Sämann PG, and others. 2011. Sleep spindles and hippocampal functional connectivity in human NREM sleep. J
Neurosci 31(28):10331–9.

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

255

Lüthi	
Andrillon T, Nir Y, Staba RJ, Ferrarelli F, Cirelli C, Tononi
G, and others. 2011. Sleep spindles in humans: insights
from intracranial EEG and unit recordings. J Neurosci
31(49):17821–34.
Astori S, Lüthi A. 2013. Synaptic plasticity at intrathalamic
connections via CaV3.3 T-type Ca2+ Channels and GluN2BContaining NMDA receptors. J Neurosci 33(2):624–30.
Astori S, Wimmer RD, Prosser HM, Corti C, Corsi M, Liaudet
N, and others. 2011. The CaV3.3 calcium channel is the
major sleep spindle pacemaker in thalamus. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 108(33):13823–8.
Beenhakker MP, Huguenard JR. 2009. Neurons that fire
together also conspire together: is normal sleep circuitry
hijacked to generate epilepsy? Neuron 62(5):612–32.
Berger H. 1933. Über das Elektrenkephalogramm des
Menschen. Sechste Mitteilung. Archiv für Arch Psychiatr
Nervenkr 99(1):555–74.
Bergmann TO, Mölle M, Diedrichs J, Born J, Siebner HR.
2012. Sleep spindle-related reactivation of category-specific cortical regions after learning face-scene associations.
Neuroimage 59(3):2733–42.
Birtoli B, Ulrich D. 2004. Firing mode-dependent synaptic
plasticity in rat neocortical pyramidal neurons. J Neurosci
24(21):4935–40.
Bonjean M, Baker T, Lemieux M, Timofeev I, Sejnowski T,
Bazhenov M. 2011. Corticothalamic feedback controls
sleep spindle duration in vivo. J Neurosci 31(25):9124–34.
Contreras D, Destexhe A, Steriade M. 1997. Intracellular and
computational characterization of the intracortical inhibitory control of synchronized thalamic inputs in vivo. J
Neurophysiol 78(1):335–50.
Cote KA, Epps TM, Campbell KB. 2000. The role of the spindle
in human information processing of high-intensity stimuli
during sleep. J Sleep Res 9(1):19–26.
Coulon P, Budde T, Pape H-C. 2012. The sleep relay - the role
of the thalamus in central and decentral sleep regulation.
Pflügers Arch 463(1):53–71.
Crandall SR, Govindaiah G, Cox CL. 2010. Low-threshold
Ca2+ current amplifies distal dendritic signaling in thalamic
reticular neurons. J Neurosci 30(46):15419–29.
Cruikshank SJ, Landisman CE, Mancilla JG, Connors BW.
2005. Connexon connexions in the thalamocortical system.
Prog Brain Res 149:41–57.
Crunelli V, Hughes SW. 2010. The slow (<1 Hz) rhythm of
non-REM sleep: a dialogue between three cardinal oscillators. Nat Neurosci 13(1):9–17.
Cueni L, Canepari M, Luján R, Emmenegger Y, Watanabe M,
Bond CT and others. 2008. T-type Ca2+ channels, SK2
channels and SERCAs gate sleep-related oscillations in
thalamic dendrites. Nat Neurosci 11(6):683–92.
Dang-Vu TT, Bonjean M, Schabus M, Boly M, Darsaud A,
Desseilles M and others. 2011. Interplay between spontaneous and induced brain activity during human nonrapid eye movement sleep. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
108(37):15438–43.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Steriade M, Sejnowski TJ, Huguenard
JR. 1996. In vivo, in vitro, and computational analysis of
dendritic calcium currents in thalamic reticular neurons. J
Neurosci 16(1):169–85.

Eschenko O, Mölle M, Born J, Sara SJ. 2006. Elevated sleep
spindle density after learning or after retrieval in rats. J
Neurosci 26(50):12914–20.
Espinosa F, Torres-Vega MA, Marks GA, Joho RH. 2008.
Ablation of Kv3.1 and Kv3.3 potassium channels disrupts
thalamocortical oscillations in vitro and in vivo. J Neurosci
28(21):5570–81.
Ferrarelli F, Peterson MJ, Sarasso S, Riedner BA, Murphy MJ,
Benca RM, and others. 2010. Thalamic dysfunction in
schizophrenia suggested by whole-night deficits in slow
and fast spindles. Am J Psychiatry 167(11):1339–48.
Fogel SM, Nader R, Cote KA, Smith CT. 2007. Sleep spindles
and learning potential. Behav Neurosci 121(1):1–10.
Fogel SM, Smith CT. 2011. The function of the sleep spindle:
A physiological index of intelligence and a mechanism
for sleep-dependent memory consolidation. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 35(5):1154–1165.
Fuentealba P, Steriade M. 2005. The reticular nucleus revisited:
intrinsic and network properties of a thalamic pacemaker.
Prog Neurobiol 75(2):125–41.
Gais S, Mölle M, Helms K, Born J. 2002. Learning-dependent
increases in sleep spindle density. J Neurosci 22(15):6830–4.
Girardeau G, Zugaro M. 2011. Hippocampal ripples and memory consolidation. Curr Opin Neurobiol 21(3):452–9.
Gorbunova YV, Spitzer NC. 2002. Dynamic interactions of
cyclic AMP transients and spontaneous Ca2+ spikes. Nature
418(6893):93–6.
Halassa MM, Siegle JH, Ritt JT, Ting JT, Feng G, Moore CI.
2011. Selective optical drive of thalamic reticular nucleus
generates thalamic bursts and cortical spindles. Nat
Neurosci 14(9):1118–20.
Hanganu-Opatz IL. 2010. Between molecules and experience:
role of early patterns of coordinated activity for the development of cortical maps and sensory abilities. Brain Res
Rev 64(1):160–76.
Huguenard JR. 1996. Low-threshold calcium currents in central
nervous system neurons. Annu Rev Physiol 58:329–48.
Johnson LA, Blakely T, Hermes D, Hakimian S, Ramsey NF,
Ojemann JG. 2012. Sleep spindles are locally modulated by
training on a brain-computer interface. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 109(45):18583–8.
Kandel A, Buzsáki G. 1997. Cellular-synaptic generation of
sleep spindles, spike-and-wave discharges, and evoked
thalamocortical responses in the neocortex of the rat. J
Neurosci 17(17):6783–97.
Kim A, Latchoumane C, Lee S, Kim GB, Cheong E, Augustine
GJ, and others. 2012. Optogenetically induced sleep spindle rhythms alter sleep architectures in mice. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 109(50):20673–8.
Kurotani T, Yamada K, Yoshimura Y, Crair MC, Komatsu
Y. 2008. State-dependent bidirectional modification of
somatic inhibition in neocortical pyramidal cells. Neuron
57(6):905–16.
Livingstone MS, Hubel D. 1981. Effects of sleep and arousal
on the processing of visual information in the cat. Nature
291(5816):554–61.
Lüthi A, McCormick DA. 1999. Modulation of a pacemaker
current through Ca2+-induced stimulation of cAMP production. Nat Neurosci 2(7):634–41.

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

256	

The Neuroscientist 20(3)

McCormick DA, Bal T. 1997. Sleep and arousal: thalamocortical mechanisms. Annu Rev Neurosci 20:185–215.
Meyer HS, Wimmer VC, Hemberger M, Bruno RM, de Kock
CP, Frick A, and others. 2010. Cell type-specific thalamic
innervation in a column of rat vibrissal cortex. Cereb
Cortex 20(10):2287–303.
Mölle M, Bergmann TO, Marshall L, Born J. 2011. Fast and
slow spindles during the sleep slow oscillation: disparate
coalescence and engagement in memory processing. Sleep
34(10):1411–21.
Mölle M, Eschenko O, Gais S, Sara SJ, Born J. 2009. The influence of learning on sleep slow oscillations and associated
spindles and ripples in humans and rats. Eur J Neurosci
29(5):1071–81.
Moruzzi G, Magoun HW. 1949. Brain stem reticular formation and activation of the EEG. EEG Clin Neurophysiol
1(4):455–73.
Mukhametov LM, Rizzolatti G, Tradardi V. 1970. Spontaneous
activity of neurones of nucleus reticularis thalami in freely
moving cats. J Physiol 210(3):651–67.
Ngo HV, Martinetz T, Born J, Mölle M. 2013. Auditory closedloop stimulation of the sleep slow oscillation enhances
memory. Neuron 78(3):545–53.
Nir Y, Staba RJ, Andrillon T, Vyazovskiy VV, Cirelli C, Fried
I and others. 2011. Regional slow waves and spindles in
human sleep. Neuron 70(1):153–69.
Peter-Derex L, Comte JC, Mauguière F, Salin PA. 2012.
Density and frequency caudo-rostral gradients of sleep
spindles recorded in the human cortex. Sleep 35(1):69–79.
Peyrache A, Battaglia FP, Destexhe A. 2011. Inhibition recruitment in prefrontal cortex during sleep spindles and gating of hippocampal inputs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
108(41):17207–12.
Phillips KG, Bartsch U, McCarthy AP, Edgar DM, Tricklebank
MD, Wafford KA, and others. 2012. Decoupling of sleepdependent cortical and hippocampal interactions in a
neurodevelopmental model of schizophrenia. Neuron
76(3):526–33.
Pinault D. 2004. The thalamic reticular nucleus: structure, function and concept. Brain Res Rev 46(1):1–31.
Purpura DP. 1968. Role of synaptic inhibition in synchronization
of thalamocortical activity. Prog Brain Res 22:107–122.
Rasch B, Born J. 2013. About Sleep’s role in memory. Physiol
Rev 93(2):681–766.
Rosanova M, Ulrich D. 2005. Pattern-specific associative longterm potentiation induced by a sleep spindle-related spike
train. J Neurosci 25(41):9398–405.
Rovó F, Mátyás F, Lüthi A, Acsády L. 2012. Molecular dissection of GABA-A receptor-mediated inhibition in mouse
thalamocortical cells. FENS Abstract 4.29.
Sanchez-Vives MV, McCormick DA. 2000. Cellular and network mechanisms of rhythmic recurrent activity in neocortex. Nat Neurosci 3(10):1027–34.
Saper CB, Fuller PM, Pedersen NP, Lu J, Scammell TE. 2010.
Sleep state switching. Neuron 68(6):1023–42.
Schabus M, Dang-Vu TT, Albouy G, Balteau E, Boly M, Carrier
J, and others. 2007. Hemodynamic cerebral correlates of

sleep spindles during human non-rapid eye movement sleep.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104(32):13164–9.
Schabus M, Dang-Vu TT, Heib DP, Boly M, Desseilles M,
Vandewalle G, and others. 2012. The fate of incoming
stimuli during NREM sleep is determined by spindles and
the phase of the slow oscillation. Front Neurol 3:40.
Schabus M, Gruber G, Parapatics S, Sauter C, Klosch G,
Anderer P, and others. 2004. Sleep spindles and their significance for declarative memory consolidation. Sleep
27(8):1479–85.
Scheibel ME, Scheibel AB. 1966. The organization of the
nucleus reticularis thalami: a Golgi study. Brain Res 1(1):
43–62.
Steriade M. 2006. Grouping of brain rhythms in corticothalamic
systems. Neuroscience 137(4):1087–106.
Steriade M, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ. 1993.
Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused
brain. Science 262(5134):679–85.
Sun YG, Pita-Almenar JD, Wu CS, Renger JJ, Uebele VN, Lu
HC, and others. 2013. Biphasic cholinergic synaptic transmission controls action potential activity in thalamic reticular nucleus neurons. J Neurosci 33(5):2048–59.
Timofeev I, Bazhenov M, Seigneur J, Sejnowski TJ. 2012.
Neuronal synchronization and thalamocortical rhythms
in sleep, wake and epilepsy. In: Noebels JL, Avoli M,
Rogawski MA, Olsen RW, Delgado-Escueta AV, editors. Jasper’s basic mechanisms of the epilepsies. 4th
ed. Bethesda, MD: National Center for Biotechnology
Information. p 157–74.
Vukadinovic Z. 2011. Sleep abnormalities in schizophrenia
may suggest impaired trans-thalamic cortico-cortical communication: towards a dynamic model of the illness. Eur J
Neurosci 34(7):1031–9.
Vyazovskiy VV, Achermann P, Borbély AA, Tobler I. 2004.
The dynamics of spindles and EEG slow-wave activity in
NREM sleep in mice. Arch Ital Biol 142(4):511–23.
Wanaverbecq N, Bodor AL, Bokor H, Slézia A, Lüthi A,
Acsády L. 2008. Contrasting the functional properties of
GABAergic axon terminals with single and multiple synapses in the thalamus. J Neurosci 28(46):11848–61.
Wimmer RD, Astori S, Bond CT, Rovó Z, Chatton JY, Adelman
JP, and others. 2012. Sustaining sleep spindles through
enhanced SK2-channel activity consolidates sleep and elevates arousal threshold. J Neurosci 32(40):13917–28.
Winsky-Sommerer R. 2009. Role of GABAA receptors in
physiology and pharmacology of sleep. Eur J Neurosci
29(9):1779–94.
Yamadori A. 1971. Role of the spindles in the onset of sleep.
Kobe J Med Sci 17(3):97–111.
Zaman T, Lee K, Park C, Paydar A, Choi JH, Cheong E, and
others. 2011. CaV2.3 channels are critical for oscillatory
burst discharges in the reticular thalamus and absence epilepsy. Neuron 70(1):95–108.
Zikopoulos B, Barbas H. 2007. Circuits for multisensory integration and attentional modulation through the prefrontal
cortex and the thalamic reticular nucleus in primates. Rev
Neurosci 18(6):417–38.

Downloaded from nro.sagepub.com at MCGILL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY on November 3, 2014

