Neuron

Perspective
Canonical Microcircuits for Predictive Coding
Andre M. Bastos,1,2,6 W. Martin Usrey,1,3,4 Rick A. Adams,8 George R. Mangun,2,3,5 Pascal Fries,6,7 and Karl J. Friston8,*
1Center

for Neuroscience
for Mind and Brain
3Department of Neurology
4Department of Neurobiology, Physiology and Behavior
5Department of Psychology
University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95618 USA
6Ernst Stru
¨ ngmann Institute (ESI) for Neuroscience in Cooperation with Max Planck Society, Deutschordenstraße 46, 60528 Frankfurt,
Germany
7Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, Kapittelweg 29, 6525 EN Nijmegen, Netherlands
8The Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, University College London, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK
*Correspondence: k.friston@ucl.ac.uk
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038
2Center

This Perspective considers the influential notion of a canonical (cortical) microcircuit in light of recent theories
about neuronal processing. Specifically, we conciliate quantitative studies of microcircuitry and the functional logic of neuronal computations. We revisit the established idea that message passing among hierarchical cortical areas implements a form of Bayesian inference—paying careful attention to the implications
for intrinsic connections among neuronal populations. By deriving canonical forms for these computations,
one can associate specific neuronal populations with specific computational roles. This analysis discloses
a remarkable correspondence between the microcircuitry of the cortical column and the connectivity implied
by predictive coding. Furthermore, it provides some intuitive insights into the functional asymmetries
between feedforward and feedback connections and the characteristic frequencies over which they operate.
Introduction
The idea that the brain actively constructs explanations for its
sensory inputs is now generally accepted. This notion builds
on a long history of proposals that the brain uses internal or
generative models to make inferences about the causes of
its sensorium (Helmholtz, 1860; Gregory, 1968, 1980; Dayan
et al., 1995). In terms of implementation, predictive coding
is, arguably, the most plausible neurobiological candidate for
making these inferences (Srinivasan et al., 1982; Mumford,
1992; Rao and Ballard, 1999). This Perspective considers the
canonical microcircuit in light of predictive coding. We focus
on the intrinsic connectivity within a cortical column and the
extrinsic connections between columns in different cortical
areas. We try to relate this circuitry to neuronal computations
by showing that the computational dependencies—implied by
predictive coding—recapitulate the physiological dependencies
implied by quantitative studies of intrinsic connectivity. This
issue is important as distinct neuronal dynamics in different
cortical layers are becoming increasingly apparent (de Kock
et al., 2007; Sakata and Harris, 2009; Maier et al., 2010; Bollimunta et al., 2011). For example, recent findings suggest that
the superficial layers of cortex show neuronal synchronization
and spike-field coherence predominantly in the gamma frequencies, while deep layers prefer lower (alpha or beta) frequencies
(Roopun et al., 2006, 2008; Maier et al., 2010; Buffalo et al.,
2011). Since feedforward connections originate predominately
from superficial layers and feedback connections from deep
layers, these differences suggest that feedforward connections
use relatively high frequencies, compared to feedback connections, as recently demonstrated empirically (Bosman et al.,
2012). These asymmetries call for something quite remarkable:

namely, a synthesis of spectrally distinct inputs to a cortical
column and the segregation of its outputs. This segregation
can only arise from local neuronal computations that are structured and precisely interconnected. It is the nature of this intrinsic
connectivity—and the dynamics it supports—that we consider.
The aim of this Perspective is to speculate about the functional
roles of neuronal populations in specific cortical layers in terms
of predictive coding. Our long-term aim is to create computationally informed models of microcircuitry that can be tested
with dynamic causal modeling (David et al., 2006; Moran et al.,
2008, 2011).
This Perspective comprises three sections. We start with an
overview of the anatomy and physiology of cortical connections,
with an emphasis on quantitative advances. The second section
considers the computational role of the canonical microcircuit
that emerges from these studies. The third section provides
a formal treatment of predictive coding and defines the requisite
computations in terms of differential equations. We then associate the form of these equations with the canonical microcircuit
to define a computational architecture. We conclude with some
predictions about intrinsic connections and note some important
asymmetries in feedforward and feedback connections that
emerge from this treatment.
The Anatomy and Physiology of Cortical Connections
This section reviews laminar-specific connections that underlie
the notion of a canonical microcircuit (Douglas et al., 1989;
Douglas and Martin, 1991, 2004). We first focus on mammalian
visual cortex and then consider whether visual microcircuitry
can be generalized to a canonical circuit for the entire cortex.
Both functional and anatomical techniques have been applied
Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 695

Neuron

Perspective

Figure 1. Douglas and Martin Model of the Canonical Microcircuit
This is a schematic of the classical microcircuit adapted from Douglas and
Martin (1991). This minimal circuitry comprises superficial (layers 2 and 3) and
deep (layers 5 and 6) pyramidal cells and a population of smooth inhibitory
cells. Feedforward inputs—from the thalamus—target all cell populations but
with an emphasis on inhibitory interneurons and superficial and granular
layers. Note the symmetrical deployment of inhibitory and excitatory intrinsic
connections that maintain a balance of excitation and inhibition.

to study intrinsic (intracortical) and extrinsic connections. We will
emphasize the insights from recent studies that combine both
techniques.
Intrinsic Connections and the Canonical Microcircuit
The seminal work of Douglas and Martin (1991), in the cat visual
system, produced a model of how information flows through the
cortical column. Douglas and Martin recorded intracellular
potentials from cells in primary visual cortex during electrical
stimulation of its thalamic afferents. They noted a stereotypical
pattern of fast excitation, followed by slower and longer-lasting
inhibition. The latency of the ensuing hyperpolarization distinguished responses in supragranular and infragranular layers.
Using conductance-based models, they showed that a simple
model could reproduce these responses. Their model contained
superficial and deep pyramidal cells with a common pool of
inhibitory cells. All three neuronal populations received thalamic
drive and were fully interconnected. The deep pyramidal cells
received relatively weak thalamic drive but strong inhibition
(Figure 1). These interconnections allowed the circuit to amplify
transient thalamic inputs to generate sustained activity in the
cortex, while maintaining a balance between excitation and
inhibition, two tasks that must be solved by any cortical circuit.
Their circuit, although based on recordings from cat visual
cortex, was also proposed as a basic theme that might be
present and replicated, with minor variations, throughout the
cortical sheet (Douglas et al., 1989).
Subsequent studies have used intracellular recordings and
histology to measure spikes (and depolarization) in pre- and
postsynaptic cells, whose cellular morphology can be determined. This approach quantifies both the connection proba696 Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

bility—defined as the number of observed connections divided
by total number of pairs recorded—and connection strength—
defined in terms of postsynaptic responses. Thomson et al.
(2002) used these techniques to study layers 2 to 5 (L2 to L5)
of the cat and rat visual systems. The most frequently connected
cells were located in the same cortical layer, where the largest
interlaminar projections were the ‘‘feedforward’’ connections
from L4 to L3 and from L3 to L5. Excitatory reciprocal ‘‘feedback’’ connections were not observed (L3 to L4) or less common
(L5 to L3), suggesting that excitation spreads within the column
in a feedforward fashion. Feedback connections were typically
seen when pyramidal cells in one layer targeted inhibitory cells
in another (see Thomson and Bannister, 2003 for a review).
While many studies have focused on excitatory connections,
a few have examined inhibitory connections. These are more difficult to study, because inhibitory cells are less common than
excitatory cells, and because there are at least seven distinct
morphological classes (Salin and Bullier, 1995). However, recent
advances in optogenetics have made it possible to target inhibitory cells more easily: Ka¨tzel and colleagues combined optogenetics and whole-cell recording to investigate the intrinsic
connectivity of inhibitory cells in mouse cortical areas M1, S1,
and V1 (Ka¨tzel et al., 2011). They transgenically expressed channelrhodopsin in inhibitory neurons and activated them while
recording from pyramidal cells. This allowed them to assess
the effect of inhibition as a function of laminar position relative
to the recorded neuron.
Several conclusions can be drawn from this approach (Ka¨tzel
et al., 2011): first, L4 inhibitory connections are more restricted in
their lateral extent, relative to other layers. This supports the
notion that L4 responses are dominated by thalamic inputs,
while the remaining laminae integrate afferents from a wider
cortical patch. Second, the primary source of inhibition originates from cells in the same layer, reflecting the prevalence of
inhibitory intralaminar connections. Third, several interlaminar
motifs appeared to be general—at least in granular cortex: principally, a strong inhibitory connection from L4 onto supragranular L2/3 and from infragranular layers onto L4. For more information on inhibitory connections, see Yoshimura and Callaway
(2005). Figure 2 provides a summary of key excitatory and inhibitory intralaminar connections.
Microcircuits in the Sensorimotor Cortex
Do the features of visual microcircuits generalize to other cortical
areas? Recently, two studies have mapped the intrinsic connectivity of mouse sensory and motor cortices: Lefort et al. (2009)
used multiple whole-cell recordings in mouse barrel cortex to
determine the probability of monosynaptic connections and
the corresponding connection strength. As in visual cortex, the
strongest connections were intralaminar and the strongest interlaminar connections were the ascending L4 to L2 and descending L3 to L5.
One puzzle about canonical microcircuits is whether motor
cortex has a local circuitry that is qualitatively similar to sensory
cortex. This question is important because motor cortex lacks
a clearly defined granular L4 (a property that earns it the name
‘‘agranular cortex’’). Weiler et al. (2008) combined whole-cell
recordings in mouse motor cortex with photostimulation to

Neuron

Perspective
Figure 2. The Canonical Cortical
Microcircuit
This is a simplified schematic of the key intrinsic
connections among excitatory (E) and inhibitory (I)
populations in granular (L4), supragranular (L1/
2/3), and infragranular (L5/6) layers. The excitatory
interlaminar connections are based largely on
Gilbert and Wiesel (1983). Forward connections
denote feedforward extrinsic corticocortical or
thalamocortical afferents that are reciprocated by
backward or feedback connections. Anatomical
and functional data suggest that afferent input
enters primarily into L4 and is conveyed to
superficial layers L2/3 that are rich in pyramidal
cells, which project forward to the next cortical
area, forming a disynaptic route between thalamus
and secondary cortical areas (Callaway, 1998).
Information from L2/3 is then sent to L5 and L6,
which sends (intrinsic) feedback projections back
to L4 (Usrey and Fitzpatrick, 1996). L5 cells originate feedback connections to earlier cortical areas
as well as to the pulvinar, superior colliculus, and
brain stem. In summary, forward input is segregated by intrinsic connections into a superficial
forward stream and a deep backward stream. In
this schematic, we have juxtaposed densely interconnected excitatory and inhibitory populations
within each layer.

uncage Glutamate. This allowed them to systematically stimulate the cortical column in a grid, centered on the pyramidal
neuron from which they recorded. By recording from pyramidal
neurons in L2–L6 (L1 lacks pyramidal cells), the authors mapped
the excitatory influence that each layer exerts over the others.
They found that the L2/3 to L5A/B was the strongest connection,
accounting for one-third of the total synaptic current in the
circuit. The second strongest interlaminar connection was the
reciprocal L5A to L2/3 connection. This pathway may be homologous to the prominent L4/5A to L2/3 pathway in sensory cortex.
Also, as in sensory cortex, recurrent (intralaminar) connections
were prominent, particularly in L2, L5A/B, and L6. The largest
fraction of synaptic input arrived in L5A/B, consistent with its
key role in accumulating information from a wide range of afferents, before sending its output to the corticospinal tract. In
summary, strong input layer to superficial and superficial to
deep connectivity, together with strong intralaminar connectivity, suggests that the intrinsic circuitry of motor cortex is
similar to other cortical areas.
The Anatomy and Physiology of Extrinsic Connections
Clearly, an account of microcircuits must refer to the layers
of origin of extrinsic connections and their laminar targets.
Although the majority of presynaptic inputs arise from intrinsic
connections, cortical areas are also richly interconnected, where
the balance between intrinsic and extrinsic processing mediates
functional integration among specialized cortical areas (Engel
et al., 2010). By numbers alone, intrinsic connections appear to
dominate—95% of all neurons labeled with a retrograde tracer
lie within about 2 mm of the injection site (Markov et al., 2011).

The remaining 5% represent cells giving
rise to extrinsic connections, which,
although sparse, can be extremely effective in driving their targets. A case in point is the LGN to V1
connection: although it is only the sixth strongest connection
to V1, LGN afferents have a substantial effect on V1 responses
(Markov et al., 2011).
Hierarchies and Functional Asymmetries
Current dogma holds that the cortex is hierarchically organized.
The idea of a cortical hierarchy rests on the distinction between
three types of extrinsic connections: feedforward connections, which link an earlier area to a higher area, feedback
connections, which link a higher to an earlier area, and lateral
connections, which link areas at the same level (reviewed in
Felleman and Van Essen, 1991). These connections are distinguished by their laminar origins and targets. Feedforward
connections originate largely from superficial pyramidal cells
and target L4, while feedback connections originate largely
from deep pyramidal cells and terminate outside of L4 (Felleman
and Van Essen, 1991). Clearly, this description of cortical hierarchies is a simplification and can be nuanced in many ways: for
example, as the hierarchical distance between two areas increases, the percentage of cells that send feedforward (respectively feedback) projections from a lower (respectively higher)
level becomes increasingly biased toward the superficial (respectively deep) layers (Barone et al., 2000; Vezoli et al., 2004).
In addition to the laminar specificity of their origins and targets,
feedforward and feedback connections also differ in their
synaptic physiology. The traditional view holds that feedforward
connections are strong and driving, capable of eliciting spiking
activity in their targets and conferring classical receptive field
properties—the prototypical example being the synaptic connection between LGN and V1 (Sherman and Guillery, 1998).
Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 697

Neuron

Perspective
Feedback connections are thought to modulate (extraclassical) receptive field characteristics according to the current
context; e.g., visual occlusion, attention, salience, etc. The prototypical example of a feedback connection is the cortical L6
to LGN connection. Sherman and Guillery identified several
properties that distinguish drivers from modulators. Driving
connections tend to show a strong ionotropic component in
their synaptic response, evoke large EPSPs, and respond to
multiple EPSPs with depressing synaptic effects. Modulatory
connections produce metabotropic and ionotropic responses
when stimulated, evoke weak EPSPs, and show paired-pulse
facilitation (Sherman and Guillery, 1998, 2011). These distinctions were based upon the inputs to the LGN, where retinal
input is driving and cortical input is modulatory. Until recently,
little data were available to assess whether a similar distinction
applies to corticocortical feedforward and feedback connections. However, recent studies show that cortical feedback
connections express not only modulatory but also driving characteristics.
Are Feedback Connections Driving, Modulatory, or
Both?
Although it is generally thought that feedback connections
are weak and modulatory (Crick and Koch, 1998; Sherman and
Guillery, 1998), recent evidence suggests that feedback connections do more than modulate lower-level responses: Sherman and colleagues recorded cells in mouse areas V1/V2 and
A1/A2, while stimulating feedforward or feedback afferents. In
both cases, driving-like responses as well as modulatory-like
responses were observed (Covic and Sherman, 2011; De Pasquale and Sherman, 2011). This indicates that—for these hierarchically proximate areas—feedback connections can drive their
targets just as strongly as feedforward connections. This is
consistent with earlier studies showing that feedback connections can be driving: Mignard and Malpeli (1991) studied the
feedback connection between areas 18 and 17, while layer A
of the LGN was pharmacologically inactivated. This silenced
the cells in L4 in area 17 but spared activity in superficial layers.
However, superficial cells were silenced when area 18 was
lesioned. This is consistent with a driving effect of feedback
connections from area 18, in the absence of geniculate input.
In summary, feedback connections can mediate modulatory
and driving effects. This is important from the point of view of
predictive coding, because top-down predictions have to elicit
obligatory responses in their targets (cells reporting prediction
errors).
In predictive coding, feedforward connections convey prediction errors, while feedback connections convey predictions
from higher cortical areas to suppress prediction errors in lower
areas. In this scheme, feedback connections should therefore be
capable of exerting strong (driving) influences on earlier areas to
suppress or counter feedforward driving inputs. However, as we
will see later, these influences also need to exert nonlinear or
modulatory effects. This is because top-down predictions are
necessarily context sensitive: e.g., the occlusion of one visual
object by another. In short, predictive coding requires feedback
connections to drive cells in lower levels in a context-sensitive
fashion, which necessitates a modulatory aspect to their postsynaptic effects.
698 Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

Are Feedback Connections Excitatory or Inhibitory?
Crucially, because feedback connections convey predictions,
which serve to explain and thereby reduce prediction errors in
lower levels, their effective (polysynaptic) connectivity is generally assumed to be inhibitory. An overall inhibitory effect of
feedback connections is consistent with in vivo studies. For
example, electrophysiological studies of the mismatch negativity
suggest that neural responses to deviant stimuli, which violate
sensory predictions established by a regular stimulus sequence,
are enhanced relative to predicted stimuli (Garrido et al., 2009).
Similarly, violating expectations of auditory repetition causes
enhanced gamma-band responses in early auditory cortex (Todorovic et al., 2011). These enhanced responses are thought
to reflect an inability of higher cortical areas to predict, and
thereby suppress, the activity of populations encoding prediction error (Garrido et al., 2007; Wacongne et al., 2011). The
suppression of predictable responses can also be regarded as
repetition suppression, observed in single-unit recordings from
the inferior temporal cortex of macaque monkeys (Desimone,
1996). Furthermore, neurons in monkey inferotemporal cortex
respond significantly less to a predicted sequence of natural
images, compared to an unpredicted sequence (Meyer and Olson, 2011).
The inhibitory effect of feedback connections is further supported by neuroimaging studies (Murray et al., 2002, 2006; Harrison et al., 2007; Summerfield et al., 2008, 2011; Alink et al.,
2010). These studies show that predictable stimuli evoke smaller
responses in early cortical areas. Crucially, this suppression
cannot be explained in terms of local adaptation, because the
attributes of the stimuli that can be predicted are not represented
in early sensory cortex (e.g., Harrison et al., 2007). It should be
noted that the suppression of responses to predictable stimuli
can coexist with (top-down) attentional enhancement of evoked
processing (Wyart et al., 2012): in predictive coding, attention is
mediated by increasing the gain of populations encoding prediction error (Spratling, 2008; Feldman and Friston, 2010). The
resulting attentional modulation (e.g., Hopfinger et al., 2000)
can interact with top-down predictions to override their suppressive influence, as demonstrated empirically (Kok et al., 2012).
See Buschman and Miller (2007), Saalmann et al. (2007),
Anderson et al. (2011), and Armstrong et al. (2012) for further
discussion of top-down connections in attention.
Further evidence for the inhibitory (suppressive) effect of
feedback connections comes from neuropsychology: patients
with damage to the prefrontal cortex (PFC) show disinhibition
of event-related potential (ERP) responses to repeating stimuli
(Knight et al., 1989; Yamaguchi and Knight, 1990; but see Barcelo´ et al., 2000). In contrast, they show reduced-amplitude
P300 ERPs in response to novel stimuli—as if there were a failure
to communicate top-down predictions to sensory cortex (Knight,
1984). Furthermore, normal subjects show a rapid adaptation to
deviant stimuli as they become predictable—an effect not seen
in prefrontal patients.
Several invasive studies complement these human studies in
suggesting an overall inhibitory role for feedback connections.
In a recent seminal study, Olsen et al. studied corticothalamic
feedback between L6 of V1 and the LGN using transgenic
expression of channelrhodopsin in L6 cells of V1. By driving

Neuron

Perspective
these cells optogenetically—while recording units in V1 and the
LGN—the authors showed that deep L6 principal cells inhibited
their extrinsic targets in the LGN and their intrinsic targets in
cortical layers 2 to 5 (Olsen et al., 2012). This suppression was
powerful—in the LGN, visual responses were suppressed by
76%. Suppression was also high in V1, around 80%–84% (Olsen
et al., 2012). This evidence is in line with classical studies of corticogeniculate contributions to length tuning in the LGN, showing
that cortical feedback contributes to the surround suppression
of feline LGN cells: without feedback, LGN cells are disinhibited
and show weaker surround suppression (Murphy and Sillito,
1987; Sillito et al., 1993; but see Alitto and Usrey, 2008).
While these studies provide convincing evidence that cortical feedback to the LGN is inhibitory, the evidence is more
complicated for corticocortical feedback connections (Sandell
and Schiller, 1982; Johnson and Burkhalter, 1996, 1997). Hupe´
et al. (1998) cooled area V5/MT while recording from areas V1,
V2, and V3 in the monkey. When visual stimuli were presented
in the classical receptive field (CRF), cooling of area V5/MT
decreased unit activity in earlier areas, suggesting an excitatory
effect of extrinsic feedback (Hupe´ et al., 1998). However, when
the authors used a stimulus that spanned the extraclassical
RF, the responses of V1 neurons were, on average, enhanced
after cooling area V5, consistent with the suppressive role of
feedback connections. These results indicate that the inhibitory
effects of feedback connections may depend on (natural) stimuli
that require integration over the visual field. Similar effects were
observed when area V2 was cooled and neurons were measured
in V1: when stimuli were presented only to the CRF, cooling V2
decreased V1 spiking activity; however, when stimuli were
present in the CRF and the surround, cooling V2 increased V1
activity (Bullier et al., 1996). Finally, others have argued for an
inhibitory effect of feedback based on the timing and spatial
extent of surround suppression in monkey V1, concluding that
the far surround suppression effects were most likely mediated
by feedback (Bair et al., 2003).
The empirical finding that feedback connections can both
facilitate and suppress firing in lower hierarchical areas—depending on the content of classical and extraclassical receptive
fields—is consistent with predictive coding: Rao and Ballard
(1999) trained a hierarchical predictive coding network to recognize natural images. They showed that higher levels in the hierarchy learn to predict visual features that extend across many
CRFs in the lower levels (e.g., tree trunks or horizons). Hence,
higher visual areas come to predict that visual stimuli will span
the receptive fields of cells in lower visual areas. In this setting,
a stimulus that is confined to a CRF would elicit a strong prediction error signal (because it cannot be predicted). This provides a simple explanation for the findings of Hupe´ et al. (1998)
and Bullier et al. (1996): when feedback connections are deactivated, there are no top-down predictions to explain responses in
lower areas, leading to a disinhibition of responses in earlier
areas when—and only when—stimuli can be predicted over
multiple CRFs.
Feedback Connections and Layer 1
How might the inhibitory effect of feedback connections be
mediated? The established view is that extrinsic corticocortical
connections are exclusively excitatory (using glutamate as their

excitatory neurotransmitter), although recent evidence suggests
that inhibitory extrinsic connections exist and may play an important role in synchronizing distant regions (Melzer et al., 2012).
However, one important route by which feedback connections
could mediate selective inhibition is via their termination in L1
(Anderson and Martin, 2006; Shipp, 2007): layer 1 is sometimes
referred to as acellular due to its pale appearance with Nissl
staining (the classical method for separating layers that selectively labels cell bodies). Indeed, a recent study concluded that
L1 contains less than 0.5% of all cells in a cortical column (Meyer
et al., 2011). These L1 cells are almost all inhibitory and interconnect strongly with each other via electrical connections and
chemical synapses (Chu et al., 2003). Simultaneous whole-cell
patch-clamp recordings show that they provide strong monosynaptic inhibition to L2/3 pyramidal cells, whose apical
dendrites project into L1 (Chu et al., 2003; Wozny and Williams,
2011). This means that L1 inhibitory cells are in a prime position
to mediate inhibitory effects of extrinsic feedback. The laminar
location highlighted by these studies—the bottom of L1 and
the top of L2/3—has recently been shown to be a ‘‘hotspot’’ of
inhibition in the column (Meyer et al., 2011). Indeed, a study of
rat barrel cortex, which stimulated (and inactivated) L1, showed
that it exerts a powerful inhibitory effect on whisker-evoked
responses (Shlosberg et al., 2006). These studies suggest that
corticocortical feedback connections could deliver strong inhibition, if they were to recruit the inhibitory potential of L1.
In terms of the excitatory and modulatory effect of feedback
connections, predictive input from higher cortical areas might
have an important impact via the distal dendrites of pyramidal
neurons (Larkum et al., 2009). Furthermore, there is a specific
type of GABAergic neuron that appears to control distal dendritic
excitability, gating top-down excitatory signals differentially
during behavior (Gentet et al., 2012). Table 1 summarizes the
studies we have discussed in relation to the role of feedback
connections.
Feedforward and Transthalamic Connections
While the evidence for an inhibitory effect of feedback connections has to be evaluated carefully, the evidence for an excitatory
effect of feedforward connections is unequivocal. For example,
in the monkey, V1 projects monosynaptically to V2, V3, V3a,
V4, and V5/MT (Zeki, 1978; Zeki and Shipp, 1988). In all
cases—when V1 is reversibly inactivated through cooling—
single-cell activity in target areas is strongly suppressed (Girard
and Bullier, 1989; Girard et al., 1991a, 1991b, 1992). In the cases
of V2 and V3, the result of cooling area V1 is a near-total silencing
of single-unit activity. These studies illustrate that activity in
higher cortical areas depends on driving inputs from earlier
cortical areas that establish their receptive field properties.
Finally, while many studies have focused on extrinsic connections that project directly from one cortical area to the next, there
is mounting evidence that feedforward driving connections (and
perhaps feedback) in the cortex could be mediated by transthalamic pathways (Sherman and Guillery, 1998, 2011). The strongest evidence for this claim comes from the somatosensory
system, where it was shown recently that the posterior medial
nucleus of the thalamus (POm)—a higher-order thalamic nucleus
that receives direct input from cortex—can relay information
Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 699

Neuron

Perspective
Table 1. Electrophysiological and Neuroimaging Findings Consistent with Predictive Coding
Prediction Violated

Area Studied

Neuronal Expression of Prediction
Error

Study

Learned visual object pairings

Monkey inferotemporal cortex (IT)

Enhanced firing rate

Meyer and Olson, 2011

Natural image statistics

Monkey V1, V2, V3

Enhanced firing rate

Hupe´ et al., 1998; Bullier et al.,
1996; Bair et al., 2003

Repetitive auditory stream

Early human auditory cortex

Enhanced event-related potentials
(ERPs), enhanced gamma-band
power

Garrido et al., 2007, 2009;
Todorovic et al., 2011

Coherence of visual form and
motion

Human V1, V2, V3, V4, V5/MT

Enhanced BOLD response

Murray et al., 2002, 2006;
Harrison et al., 2007

Audio-visual congruence of
speech

Visual and auditory cortex

Gamma-band oscillatory activity

Arnal et al., 2011

Predictability of visual stimuli
as a function of attention

Human V1, V2, V3

Enhanced BOLD response when
unattended, reduced BOLD when
attended

Kok et al., 2012

Hierarchical expectations in
auditory sequences

Human temporal cortex

Enhanced ERPs

Wacongne et al., 2011

Expected repetition (or alternation)
of face stimuli

FFA in fMRI, parietal and central
electrodes of EEG

Enhanced BOLD response,
diminished repetition suppression
of ERP

Summerfield et al., 2008, 2011

Apparent motion of visual stimulus

V1

Enhanced BOLD response

Alink et al., 2010

between S1 and S2 (Theyel et al., 2010). In addition, the thalamic
reticular nucleus has been proposed to mediate the inhibition
that might underlie crossmodal attention or top-down predictions (Yamaguchi and Knight, 1990; Crick, 1984; Wurtz et al.,
2011). Furthermore, computational considerations and recent
experimental findings point to a potentially important role for
higher-order thalamic nuclei in coordinating and synchronizing
cortical responses (Vicente et al., 2008; Saalmann et al., 2012).
The degree to which cortical areas are integrated directly via
corticocortical or indirectly via cortico-thalamo-cortical connections—and the extent to which transthalamic pathways dissociate feedforward from feedback connections in the same way
as we have proposed for the corticocortical connections—are
open questions.
The Canonical Microcircuit
Central to the idea of a canonical microcircuit is the notion that
a cortical column contains the circuitry necessary to perform
requisite computations and that these circuits can be replicated
with minor variations throughout the cortex. One of the clearest
examples of how cortical circuits process simple inputs—to
generate complex outputs—is the emergence of orientation
tuning in V1. Orientation tuning is a distinctly cortical phenomenon because geniculocortical relay cells show no orientation
preferences. A further elaboration of cortical responses can be
found in the distinction between simple and complex cells—
while simple cells possess spatially confined receptive fields,
complex cells are orientation tuned but show less preference
for the location of an oriented bar. Hubel and Wiesel proposed
a model for how intrinsic and extrinsic connectivity could establish a circuit explaining these receptive field properties. They
proposed that orientation tuning in simple cells could be generated by a single cortical cell receiving input from several ON
700 Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

center-OFF surround geniculate cells arranged along a particular orientation, thereby endowing it with a preference for
bars oriented in a particular direction (Hubel and Wiesel, 1962).
Complex cells were hypothesized to receive inputs from
several simple cells—with the same orientation preference and
slightly varying receptive field locations. Thus, complex cells
were thought not to receive direct LGN input but to be higherorder cells in cortex. Subsequent findings supported these
predictions, showing that input layers 4Ca and 4Cb contained
the largest proportion of cells receiving monosynaptic geniculate input, while superficial and deep layer cells contain a larger
number of cells receiving disynaptic or polysynaptic input (Bullier
and Henry, 1980). Furthermore, simple cells project monosynaptically onto complex cells, where they exert a strong feedforward influence (Alonso and Martinez, 1998; Alonso, 2002).
These models suggest that intrinsic cortical circuitry allows processing to proceed along discrete steps that are capable of
producing response properties in outputs that are not present
in inputs.
Segregation of Processing Streams
A key property of canonical circuits is the segregation of parallel
streams of processing. For example, in primates, parvocellular
input enters the cortex primarily in layer 4Cb, whereas magnocellular inputs enter in 4Ca. The corticogeniculate feedback
pathway from L6 maintains this segregation, as upper L6 cells
preferentially synapse onto parvocellular cells in the LGN, while
lower L6 cells target the magnocellular LGN layers (Fitzpatrick
et al., 1994; Briggs and Usrey, 2009). Further examples of stream
segregation are also present in the dorsal ‘‘where’’ and the
ventral ‘‘what’’ pathways and in the projection from V1 to the
thick, thin, and interstripe regions of V2 (Zeki and Shipp, 1988;
Sincich and Horton, 2005).

Neuron

Perspective
Superficial and deep layers are anatomically interconnected,
but mounting evidence suggests that they constitute functionally
distinct processing streams: in an elegant experiment, Roopun
et al. (2006) showed that L2/3 of rat somatomotor cortex shows
prominent gamma oscillations that are coexpressed with beta
oscillations in L5. Both rhythms persisted when superficial and
deep layers were disconnected at the level of L4. Maier et al.
(2010) used multilaminar recordings to show strong local field
potential (LFP) coherence among sites within the superficial
layers (the superficial compartment), as well as strong coherence among sites in deep layers (the deep compartment) but
weak intercompartment coherence. These studies indicate a
segregation of—potentially autonomous—supragranular and
infragranular dynamics. Maier et al. (2010) found that supragranular sites had higher broadband gamma power than infragranular sites. This pattern was reversed in the alpha and beta range,
with greater power in the infragranular and granular layers.
Finally, the spiking activity of neurons in the superficial layers
of visual cortex are more coherent with gamma-frequency oscillations in the local field potential, while neurons in deep layers are
more coherent with alpha-frequency oscillations (Buffalo et al.,
2011). This finding is consistent with an earlier study by Livingstone (1996) showing that 50% of cells in L2/3 of squirrel monkey
V1 expressed gamma oscillations, compared to less than 20%
of cells in L4C and infragranular layers. The different spectral
behavior of superficial and deep layers has led to the interesting
proposal that feedforward and feedback signaling may be mediated by distinct (high and low) frequencies (reviewed in Wang,
2010; see also Buschman and Miller, 2007), a proposal that
has recently received experimental support, at least for the feedforward connections (Bosman et al., 2012; see also Gregoriou
et al., 2009).
Integration and Segregation within Canonical Circuits
Given this functional and anatomical segregation into parallel
streams, the question naturally arises, how are these streams
integrated? It has been previously suggested that integration
occurs through the synchronized firing of multiple neurons that
form a neural ensemble (Gray et al., 1989; Singer, 1999), while
others have emphasized interareal phase synchronization or
coherence (Varela et al., 2001; Fries, 2005; Fujisawa and Buzsa´ki, 2011). While a full treatment of this question is beyond
the scope of the current Perspective, we propose that the canonical microcircuit contains a clue for how the dialectic between
segregation and integration might be resolved. While top-down
and bottom-up inputs and outputs may be segregated in layers,
streams, and frequency bands, the canonical microcircuit specifies the circuitry for how the basic units of cortex are interconnected and therefore how the intrinsic activity of the cortical
column is entrained by extrinsic inputs. This intrinsic connectivity
specifies how the cells of origin and termination of extrinsic
projections are interconnected and thus determines how topdown and bottom-up streams are integrated within each cortical
column.
Spatial Segregation and Cortical Columns
The notion of a canonical microcircuit implicitly assumes that
each circuit is distinct from its neighbors, which could presumably carry out computations in parallel. Therefore, the canonical

microcircuit specifies the spatial scale over which processing is
integrated. The most likely candidate for this spatial scale is the
cortical column, which can vary over three orders of magnitude
between minicolumns, columns, and hypercolumns. Minicolumns are only a few cells wide, estimated to be about 50–
60 mm in diameter by Mountcastle (1997) and are seen in Nissl
sections of cortex as slight variations in cell density. Minicolumns
were originally proposed as elementary units of cortex by Lorente de No (1949) and appear to reflect the migration of cells
from the ventricular zone to the cortical sheet during fetal development (reviewed in Horton and Adams, 2005). Hubel and Wiesel estimated that orientation columns were on this order of
magnitude, about 25–50 mm wide, although they failed to establish a correspondence between orientation columns observed
physiologically and the minicolumns seen in Nissl sections
(Hubel and Wiesel, 1974). A cortical column was classically
defined as a vertical alignment of cells containing neurons with
similar receptive field properties, such as orientation preference
and ocular dominance in V1 or touch in somatosensory cortex
(Mountcastle, 1957; Hubel and Wiesel, 1972). These columns
were suggested by Mountcastle to encompass a number of
minicolumns, with a width of 300–400 mm (Mountcastle, 1997).
Finally, Hubel and Wiesel defined a hypercolumn to be the unit
of cortex necessary to traverse all possible values of a particular
receptive field property, such as orientation or eye dominance,
estimated to be between 0.5 and 1 mm wide (Hubel and Wiesel,
1974).
Columns, Connections, and Computations
So is the cortical column the basic unit of cortical computation?
Some authors emphasize that even within a dendrite, there
are all the necessary biophysical mechanisms for performing
surprisingly advanced computations, such as direction selectivity, coincidence detection, or temporal integration (Ha¨usser
and Mel, 2003; London and Ha¨usser, 2005). Others argue that
single neurons can process their inputs at the dendrite, soma,
and initial segment, such that the output spike trains of just
two interconnected cells could mediate computations like
independent components analysis (Klampfl et al., 2009). Others
posit that cortical columns form the basic computational unit
(Mountcastle, 1997; Hubel and Wiesel, 1972; but see Horton
and Adams, 2005). Donald Hebb proposed that neurons distributed over several cortical areas could form a functional computational unit called a neural assembly (Hebb, 1949). This view
has re-emerged in recent years, with the development of the
requisite recording and analytic techniques for evaluating this
proposal (Buzsa´ki, 2010; Canolty et al., 2010; Singer et al.,
1997; Lopes-dos-Santos et al., 2011).
Computational modeling studies indicate that cortical
columns with structured connectivity are computationally more
efficient than a network containing the same number of neurons
but with random connectivity (Haeusler and Maass, 2007).
Others suggest that this circuitry allows the cortex to organize
and integrate bottom-up, lateral, and top-down information (Ullman, 1995; Raizada and Grossberg, 2003). Douglas and Martin
suggest that the rich anatomical connectivity of L2/3 pyramidal
cells allows them to collect information from top-down, lateral,
and bottom-up inputs, and—through processing in the dendritic
tree—select the most likely interpretation of its inputs. More
Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 701

Neuron

Perspective
recently, George and Hawkins have suggested that the canonical microcircuit implements a form of Bayesian processing
(George and Hawkins, 2009). In the following section, we pursue
similar ideas but ground them in the framework of predictive
coding and propose a cortical circuit that could implement
predictive coding through canonical interconnections. In particular, we find that the proposed circuitry agrees remarkably well
with quantitative characterizations of the canonical microcircuit
(Haeusler and Maass, 2007).
A Canonical Microcircuit for Predictive Coding
This section considers the computational role of cortical microcircuitry in more detail. We try to show that the computations
performed by canonical microcircuits can be specified more
precisely than one might imagine and that these computations
can be understood within the framework of predictive coding.
In brief, we will show that (hierarchical Bayesian) inference about
the causes of sensory input can be cast as predictive coding.
This is important because it provides formal constraints on the
dynamics one would expect to find in neuronal circuits. Having
established these constraints, we then attempt to match them
with the neurobiological constraints afforded by the canonical
microcircuit. The endpoint of this exercise is a canonical microcircuit for predictive coding.
Predictive Coding and the Free Energy Principle
It might be thought impossible to specify the computations performed by the brain. However, there are some fairly fundamental
constraints on the basic form of neuronal dynamics. The argument goes as follows—and can be regarded as a brief summary
of the free energy principle (see Friston, 2010 for details).
d

d

d

d

Biological systems are homeostatic (or allostatic), which
means that they minimize the dispersion (entropy) of their
interoceptive and exteroceptive states.
Entropy is the average of surprise over time, which means
that biological systems minimize the surprise associated
with their sensory states at each point in time.
In statistics, surprise is the negative logarithm of Bayesian
model evidence, which means that biological systems—
like the brain—must continually maximize the Bayesian
evidence for their (generative) model of sensory inputs.
Maximizing Bayesian model evidence corresponds to
Bayesian filtering of sensory inputs. This is also known as
predictive coding.

These arguments mean that by minimizing surprise, through
selecting appropriate sensations, the brain is implicitly maximizing
the evidence for its own existence—this is known as active inference. In other words, to maintain a homeostasis, the brain must
predict its sensory states on the basis of a model. Fulfilling those
predictions corresponds to accumulating evidence for that
model—and the brain that embodies it. The implicit maximization
of Bayesian model evidence provides an important link to the
Bayesian brain hypothesis (Hinton and van Camp, 1993; Dayan
et al., 1995; Knill and Pouget, 2004) and many other compelling
proposals about perceptual synthesis, including analysis by
synthesis (Neisser, 1967; Yuille and Kersten, 2006), epistemological automata (MacKay, 1956), the principle of minimum redun702 Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

dancy (Attneave, 1954; Barlow, 1961; Dan et al., 1996), the Infomax principle (Linsker, 1990; Atick, 2011; Kay and Phillips,
2011), and perception as hypothesis testing (Gregory, 1968, 1980).
The most popular scheme—for Bayesian filtering in neuronal
circuits—is predictive coding (Srinivasan et al., 1982; Buchsbaum and Gottschalk, 1983; Rao and Ballard, 1999). In this
context, surprise corresponds (roughly) to prediction error. In
predictive coding, top-down predictions are compared with
bottom-up sensory information to form a prediction error.
This prediction error is used to update higher-level representations, upon which top-down predictions are based. These optimized predictions then reduce prediction error at lower levels.
To predict sensations, the brain must be equipped with a
generative model of how its sensations are caused (Helmholtz,
1860). Indeed, this led Geoffrey Hinton and colleagues to
propose that the brain is an inference (Helmholtz) machine (Hinton and Zemel, 1994; Dayan et al., 1995). A generative model
describes how variables or causes in the environment conspire
to produce sensory input. Generative models map from (hidden)
causes to (sensory) consequences. Perception then corresponds to the inverse mapping from sensations to their causes,
while action can be thought of as the selective sampling of
sensations. Crucially, the form of the generative model dictates
the form of the inversion—for example, predictive coding. Figure 3 depicts a general model as a probabilistic graphical
model. A special case of these models are hierarchical dynamic
models (see Figure 4), which grandfather most parametric
models in statistics and machine learning (see Friston, 2008).
These models explain sensory data in terms of hidden causes
and states. Hidden causes and states are both hidden variables
that cause sensations but they play slightly different roles:
hidden causes link different levels of the model and mediate
conditional dependencies among hidden states at each level.
Conversely, hidden states model conditional dependencies
over time (i.e., memory) by modeling dynamics in the world. In
short, hidden causes and states mediate structural and dynamic
dependencies, respectively.
The details of the graph in Figure 3 are not important; it just
provides a way of describing conditional dependencies among
hidden states and causes responsible for generating sensory
input. These dependencies mean that we can interpret neuronal
activity as message passing among the nodes of a generative
model, in which each canonical microcircuit contains representations or expectations about hidden states and causes. In other
words, the form of the underlying generative model defines
the form of the predictive coding architecture used to invert the
model. This is illustrated in Figure 4, where each node has a single
parent. We will deal with this simple sort of model because it
lends itself to an unambiguous description in terms of bottomup (feedforward) and top-down (feedback) message passing.
We now look at how perception or model inversion—recovering
the hidden states and causes of this model given sensory data—
might be implemented at the level of a microcircuit.
Predictive Coding and Message Passing
In predictive coding, representations (or conditional expectations) generate top-down predictions to produce prediction
errors. These prediction errors are then passed up the hierarchy

Neuron

Perspective

“A bird in song”

Figure 3. Hierarchical Generative Models
This schematic shows an example of a generative model. Generative models describe how (sensory) data are caused. In this figure, sensory states (blue circles on
the periphery) are generated by hidden variables (in the center). Left: the model as a probabilistic graphical model, in which unknown variables (hidden causes and
states) are associated with the nodes of a dependency graph and conditional dependencies are indicated by arrows. Hidden states confer memory on the model
by virtue of having dynamics, while hidden causes connect nodes. A graphical model describes the conditional dependencies among hidden variables generating
~ ðiÞ with precision (inverse variance)
data. These dependencies are typically modeled as (differential) equations with nonlinear mappings and random fluctuations u
PðiÞ (see the equations in the insert on the left). This allows one to specify the precise form of the probabilistic generative model and leads to a simple and efficient
inversion scheme (predictive coding; see Figure 4). Here v~paðiÞ denotes the set of hidden causes that constitute the parents of sensory s~ðiÞ or hidden x~ðiÞ states. The
‘‘$’’ indicates states in generalized coordinates of motion: x~ = ðx; x0 ; x00 ; .Þ. Right: an intuitive version of the model: here, we imagine that a singing bird is the cause
of sensations, which—through a cascade of dynamical hidden states—produces modality-specific consequences (e.g., the auditory object of a bird song and the
visual object of a song bird). These intermediate causes are themselves (hierarchically) unpacked to generate sensory signals. The generative model therefore
maps from causes (e.g., concepts) to consequences (e.g., sensations), while its inversion corresponds to mapping from sensations to concepts or representations. This inversion corresponds to perceptual synthesis, in which the generative model is used to generate predictions. Note that this inversion implicitly
resolves the binding problem by explaining multisensory cues with a single cause.

in the reverse direction, to update conditional expectations. This
ensures an accurate prediction of sensory input and all its intermediate representations. This hierarchal message passing can
be expressed mathematically as a gradient descent on the
(sum of squared) prediction errors xðiÞ = PðiÞ~εðiÞ , where the prediction errors are weighted by their precision (inverse variance):
ðiÞ
mðiÞ
εðiÞ ,xðiÞ À xðiv + 1Þ
m
~_ v = D~
v À vv~~
ðiÞ
mðiÞ
m
~_ x = D~
εðiÞ ,xðiÞ
x À vx~~

À ðiÀ1Þ
À ðiÞ ðiÞ ÁÁ
ðiÞ ðiÞ
~ v À gðiÞ m
~x ; m
xðiÞ
~v
εv = PðiÞ
v m
v = Pv ~
À ðiÞ
À ðiÞ ðiÞ ÁÁ
ðiÞ ðiÞ
xðiÞ
mx À f ðiÞ m
~x ; m
~v :
εx = PðiÞ
x D~
x = Px ~

(1)

The first pair of equalities just says that conditional expectations about hidden causes and states ð~
mðiÞ
~ ðiÞ
v ;m
x Þ are updated
based upon the way we would predict them to change—the first
term—and subsequent terms that minimize prediction error. The
second pair of equations simply expresses prediction error
ðiÞ
ðxðiÞ
v ; xx Þ as the difference between conditional expectations
about hidden causes and (the changes in) hidden states and their
ðiÞ
ðiÞ
predicted values, weighed by their precisions ðPv ; Px Þ. These
predictions are nonlinear functions of conditional expectations
ðgðiÞ ; f ðiÞ Þ at each level of the hierarchy and the level above.
It is difficult to overstate the generality and importance of
Equation (1)—it grandfathers nearly every known statistical estimation scheme, under parametric assumptions about additive
noise. These range from ordinary least squares to advanced
Bayesian filtering schemes (see Friston, 2008). In this general
Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 703

Neuron

Perspective
Figure 4. Hierarchical Inference and
Predictive Coding
This figure describes the predictive coding
scheme associated with a simple hierarchical
model shown on the left. In this model each node
has a single parent. The ensuing inversion or
generalized predictive coding scheme is shown on
the right. The key quantities in this scheme are
(conditional) expectations of the hidden states and
causes and their associated prediction errors. The
basic architecture—implied by the inversion of the
graphical (hierarchical) model—suggests that
prediction errors (caused by unpredicted fluctuations in hidden variables) are passed up the hierarchy to update conditional expectations. These
conditional expectations now provide predictions
that are passed down the hierarchy to form
prediction errors. We presume that the forward
and backward message passing between hierarchical levels is mediated by extrinsic (feedforward and feedback) connections. Neuronal populations encoding
conditional expectations and prediction errors now have to be deployed in a canonical microcircuit to understand the computational logic of intrinsic
connections—within each level of the hierarchy—as shown in the next figure.

setting, Equation (1) minimizes variational free energy and corresponds to generalized predictive coding. Under linear models, it
reduces to linear predictive coding, also known as Kalman-Bucy
filtering (see Friston, 2010 for details).
In neuronal network terms, Equation (1) says that prediction
error units receive messages from the same level and the level
above. This is because the hierarchical form of the model only
requires conditional expectations from neighboring levels to
form prediction errors, as can be seen schematically in Figure 4.
Conversely, expectations are driven by prediction error from the
same level and the level below—updating expectations about
hidden states and causes respectively. These constitute the
bottom-up and lateral messages that drive conditional expectations to provide better predictions—or representations—that
suppress prediction error. This updating corresponds to an accumulation of prediction errors, in that the rate of change of conditional expectations is proportional to prediction error. Electrophysiologically, this means that one would expect to see a transient
prediction error response to bottom-up afferents (in neuronal
populations encoding prediction error) that is suppressed to
baseline firing rates by sustained responses (in neuronal populations encoding predictions). This is the essence of recurrent
message passing between hierarchical levels to suppress prediction error (see Friston, 2008 for a more detailed discussion).
The nature of this message passing is remarkably consistent
with the anatomical and physiological features of cortical hierarchies. An important prediction is that the nonlinear functions of
the generative model—modeling context-sensitive dependencies among hidden variables—appear only in the top-down
and lateral predictions. This means, neurobiologically, we would
predict feedback connections to possess nonlinear or neuromodulatory characteristics, in contrast to feedforward connections
that mediate a linear mixture of prediction errors. This functional
asymmetry is exactly consistent with the empirical evidence
reviewed above. Another key feature of Equation (1) is that the
top-down predictions produce prediction errors through subtraction. In other words, feedback connections should exert
inhibitory effects, of the sort seen empirically. Table 2 summarizes the features of extrinsic connectivity (reviewed in the previous section) that are explained by predictive coding. In the
704 Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

remainder of this Perspective, we focus on intrinsic connections
and cortical microcircuits.
The Cortical Microcircuit and Predictive Coding
We now try to associate the variables in Equation (1) with specific
populations in the canonical microcircuit. Figure 5 illustrates
a remarkable correspondence between the form of Equation
(1) and the connectivity of the canonical microcircuit. Furthermore, the resulting scheme corresponds almost exactly to the
computational architecture proposed by Mumford (1992). This
correspondence rests upon the following intuitive steps.
d

d

d

d

d

First, we divide the excitatory cells in the superficial
and deep layers into principal (pyramidal) cells and excitatory interneurons. This accommodates the fact that (in
macaque V1) a significant percentage of superficial L2/3
cells (about half) and deep L5 excitatory cells (about
80%) do not project outside the cortical column (Callaway
and Wiser, 1996; Briggs and Callaway, 2005).
Second, we know that the superficial and deep pyramidal
cells provide feedforward and feedback connections,
respectively. This means that superficial pyramidal cells
must encode and broadcast prediction errors on hidden
causes xðiv + 1Þ , while deep pyramidal cells must encode
conditional expectations ð~
mðiÞ
~ ðiÞ
v ;m
x Þ so that they can elaborate feedback predictions.
Third, we know that the (spiny stellate) excitatory cells in
the granular layer receive feedforward connections encoding prediction errors xðiÞ
v on the hidden causes of the level
below.
This leaves the inhibitory interneurons in the granular layer,
which, for symmetry, we associate with prediction errors
on the hidden states.
The remaining populations are the excitatory and inhibitory interneurons in the supragranular layer, to which we
assign expectations about hidden causes and states,
respectively. These are mapped through descending
(intrinsic) feedforward connections to cells in the deep
layers that generate predictions. We do not suppose that
this is a simple one-to-one mapping—rather it mediates

Neuron

Perspective
Table 2. The Functional Correlates of the Anatomy and Physiology of Cortical Hierarchies and Their Extrinsic Connections
Anatomy and Physiology

Functional Correlates

Hierarchical organization of cortical areas (Zeki and Shipp, 1988;
Felleman and Van Essen, 1991; Barone et al., 2000; Vezoli et al., 2004).

Encoding of conditional dependencies in terms of a graphical model
(Mumford, 1992; Rao and Ballard, 1999; Friston, 2008).

Distinct (laminar-specific) neuronal responses (Douglas et al., 1989;
Douglas and Martin, 1991).

Encoding expected states of the world (superficial pyramidal cells) and
prediction errors (deep pyramidal cells) (Mumford, 1992; Friston, 2008).

Distinct (laminar-specific) extrinsic connections (Zeki and Shipp,
1988; Felleman and Van Essen, 1991; Barone et al., 2000; Vezoli et al.,
2004; Markov et al., 2011).

Forward connections convey prediction error (from superficial
pyramidal cells) and backward connections convey predictions (from
deep pyramidal cells) (Mumford, 1992; Friston, 2008).

Reciprocal extrinsic connectivity (Zeki and Shipp, 1988; Felleman
and Van Essen, 1991; Barone et al., 2000; Vezoli et al., 2004;
Markov et al., 2011).

Recurrent dynamics are intrinsically stable because they are trying to
suppress prediction error (Crick and Koch, 1998; Friston, 2008).

Feedback extrinsic connections are (driving and) modulatory
(Mignard and Malpeli, 1991; Bullier et al., 1996; Sherman and Guillery,
1998; Covic and Sherman, 2011; De Pasquale and Sherman, 2011).

Forward (driving) and backward (driving and modulatory) connections
mediate the (linear) influence of prediction errors and the (linear and
nonlinear) construction of predictions (Friston, 2008, 2010).

Feedback extrinsic connections are inhibitory (Murphy and Sillito,
1987; Sillito et al., 1993; Chu et al., 2003; Olsen et al., 2012; Meyer
et al., 2011; Wozny and Williams, 2011).

Top-down predictions suppress or counter prediction errors
produced by bottom-up inputs (Mumford, 1992; Rao and Ballard,
1999; Friston, 2008).

Differences in neuronal dynamics of superficial and deep layers
(de Kock et al., 2007; Sakata and Harris, 2009; Maier et al., 2010;
Bollimunta et al., 2011; Buffalo et al., 2011).

Principal cells elaborating predictions (deep pyramidal cells) may
show distinct (low-pass) dynamics, relative to those encoding error
(superficial pyramidal cells) (Friston, 2008).

Dense intrinsic and horizontal connectivity (Thomson and Bannister,
2003; Ka¨tzel et al., 2011).

Lateral predictions and prediction errors mediating winnerless
competition and competitive lateral dependencies (Desimone, 1996;
Friston, 2010).

Predominance of nonlinear synaptic (dendritic and neuromodulatory)
infrastructure in superficial layers (Ha¨usser and Mel, 2003; London
and Ha¨usser, 2005; Gentet et al., 2012).

Required to scale prediction errors, in proportion to their precision,
affording a form of cortical bias or gain control that encodes
uncertainty (Feldman and Friston, 2010; Spratling, 2008).

the nonlinear transformation of expectations to predictions
required by the earlier cortical level.
This arrangement accommodates the fact that the dependencies among hidden states are confined to each node (by the
nature of graphical models), which means that their expectations
and prediction errors should be encoded by interneurons.
Furthermore, the splitting of excitatory cells in the upper layers
into two populations (encoding expectations and prediction
errors on hidden causes) is sensible, because there is a oneto-one mapping between the expectations on hidden causes
and their prediction errors.
The ensuing architecture bears a striking correspondence to
the microcircuit in Haeusler and Maass (2007) in the left panel
of Figure 5, in the sense that nearly every connection required
by the predictive coding scheme appears to be present in terms
of quantitative measures of intrinsic connectivity. However, there
are two exceptions that both involve connections to the inhibitory cells in the granular layer (shown as dotted lines in Figure 5).
Predictive coding requires that these cells (which encode prediction errors on hidden states) compare the expected changes in
hidden states with the actual changes. This suggests that there
should be interlaminar projections from supragranular (inhibitory)
and infragranular (excitatory) cells. In terms of their synaptic
characteristics, one would predict that these intrinsic connections would be of a feedback sort, in the sense that they convey
predictions. Although not considered in this Haeusler and Maass
scheme, feedback connections from infragranular layers are
an established component of the canonical microcircuit (see
Figure 2).

Functional Asymmetries in the Microcircuit
The circuitry in Figure 5 appears consistent with the broad
scheme of ascending (feedforward) and descending (feedback)
intrinsic connections: feedforward prediction errors from a
lower cortical level arrive at granular layers and are passed
forward to excitatory and inhibitory interneurons in supragranular
layers, encoding expectations. Strong and reciprocal intralaminar connections couple superficial excitatory interneurons and
pyramidal cells. Excitatory and inhibitory interneurons in supragranular layers then send strong feedforward connections to
the infragranular layer. These connections enable deep pyramidal cells and excitatory interneurons to produce (feedback)
predictions, which ascend back to L4 or descend to a lower
hierarchical level. This arrangement recapitulates the functional
asymmetries between extrinsic feedforward and feedback connections and is consistent with the empirical characteristics of
intrinsic connections.
If we focus on the superficial and deep pyramidal cells, the
form of the recognition dynamics in Equation (1) tells us something quite fundamental: we would anticipate higher frequencies
in the superficial pyramidal cells, relative to the deep pyramidal
cells. One can see this easily by taking the Fourier transform of
the first equality in Equation (1):
ðjuÞ~
mðiÞ
mðiÞ
εðiÞ ,xðiÞ ðuÞ À xðiv + 1Þ ðuÞ:
v ðuÞ = D~
v ðuÞ À vv~~

(2)

This equation says that the contribution of any (angular)
frequency u in the prediction errors (encoded by superficial pyramidal cells) to the expectations (encoded by the deep pyramidal
cells) is suppressed in proportion to that frequency (Friston,
Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 705

Neuron

Perspective

Figure 5. A Canonical Microcircuit for Predictive Coding
Left: the canonical microcircuit based on Haeusler and Maass (2007), in which we have removed inhibitory cells from the deep layers because they have very little
interlaminar connectivity. The numbers denote connection strengths (mean amplitude of PSPs measured at soma in mV) and connection probabilities (in
parentheses) according to Thomson et al. (2002). Right: the proposed cortical microcircuit for predictive coding, in which the quantities of the previous figure have
been associated with various cell types. Here, prediction error populations are highlighted in pink. Inhibitory connections are shown in red, while excitatory
connections are in black. The dotted lines refer to connections that are not present in the microcircuit on the left (but see Figure 2). In this scheme, expectations
(about causes and states) are assigned to (excitatory and inhibitory) interneurons in the supragranular layers, which are passed to infragranular layers. The
corresponding prediction errors occupy granular layers, while superficial pyramidal cells encode prediction errors that are sent forward to the next hierarchical
level. Conditional expectations and prediction errors on hidden causes are associated with excitatory cell types, while the corresponding quantities for hidden
states are assigned to inhibitory cells. Dark circles indicate pyramidal cells. Finally, we have placed the precision of the feedforward prediction errors against the
superficial pyramidal cells. This quantity controls the postsynaptic sensitivity or gain to (intrinsic and top-down) presynaptic inputs. We have previously discussed
this in terms of attentional modulation, which may be intimately linked to the synchronization of presynaptic inputs and ensuing postsynaptic responses (Feldman
and Friston, 2010; Fries et al., 2001).

2008). In other words, high frequencies should be attenuated
when passing from superficial to deep pyramidal cells. There is
nothing mysterious about this attenuation—it is a simple consequence of the fact that conditional expectations accumulate
prediction errors, thereby suppressing high-frequency fluctuations to produce smooth estimates of hidden causes. This
smoothing—inherent in Bayesian filtering—leads to an asymmetry in frequency content of superficial and deep cells: for
example, superficial cells should express more gamma relative
to beta, and deep cells should express more beta relative to
gamma (Roopun et al., 2006, 2008; Maier et al., 2010).
Figure 6 provides a schematic illustration of the spectral asymmetry predicted by Equation 2. Note that predictions about the
relative amplitudes of high and low frequencies in superficial
and deep layers pertain to all frequencies—there is nothing in
predictive coding per se to suggest characteristic frequencies
in the gamma and beta ranges. However, one might speculate
706 Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

that the characteristic frequencies of canonical microcircuits
have evolved to model and—through active inference—create
the sensorium (Berkes et al., 2011; Engbert et al., 2011; Friston,
2010). Indeed, there is empirical evidence to support this notion
in the visual (Lakatos et al., 2008; Meirovithz et al., 2012; Bosman
et al., 2012) and motor (Gwin and Ferris, 2012) domain.
In summary, predictions are formed by a linear accumulation
of prediction errors. Conversely, prediction errors are nonlinear
functions of predictions. This means that the conversion of
prediction errors into predictions (Bayesian filtering) necessarily
entails a loss of high frequencies. However, the nonlinearity in
the mapping from predictions to prediction errors means that
high frequencies can be created (consider the effect of squaring a sine wave, which would convert beta into gamma). In
short, prediction errors should express higher frequencies than
the predictions that accumulate them. This is another example of a potentially important functional asymmetry between

Neuron

Perspective
Figure 6. Spectral Asymmetries in
Superficial and Deep Cells
This schematic illustrates the functional asymmetry between the spectral activity of superficial and
deep cells predicted theoretically. In this illustrative example, we have ignored the effects of
influences on the expectations of hidden causes
(encoded by deep pyramidal cells), other than the
prediction error on causes (encoded by superficial
pyramidal cells). The bottom panel shows the
spectral density of deep pyramidal cell activity,
given the spectral density of superficial pyramidal
cell activity in the top panel. The equation expresses the spectral density of the deep cells as
a function of the spectral density of the superficial
cells, using Equation (2). This schematic is meant
to illustrate how the relative amounts of low (beta)and high (gamma)-frequency activity in superficial
and deep cells can be explained by the evidence
accumulation implicit in predictive coding.

feedforward and feedback message passing that emerges under
predictive coding. It is particularly interesting given recent evidence that feedforward connections may use higher frequencies
than feedback connections (Bosman et al., 2012).
Conclusion
In conclusion, there is a remarkable correspondence between
the anatomy and physiology of the canonical microcircuit and
the formal constraints implied by generalized predictive coding.
Having said this, there are many variations on the mapping
between computational and neuronal architectures: even if
predictive coding is an appropriate implementation of Bayesian
filtering, there are many variations on the arrangement shown
in Figure 5. For example, feedback connections could arise
directly from cells encoding conditional expectations in supragranular layers. Indeed, there is emerging evidence that feedback connections between proximate hierarchical levels originate from both deep and superficial layers (Markov et al.,
2011). Note that this putative splitting of extrinsic streams is
only predicted in the light of empirical constraints on intrinsic
connectivity.
One of our motivations—for considering formal constraints on
connectivity—was to produce dynamic causal models of canonical microcircuits. Dynamic causal modeling enables one to
compare different connectivity models, using empirical electrophysiological responses (David et al., 2006; Moran et al.,
2008, 2011). This form of modeling rests upon Bayesian model

comparison and allows one to assess
the evidence for one microcircuit relative
to another. In principle, this provides
a way to evaluate different microcircuit
models, in terms of their ability to explain
observed activity. One might imagine that
the particular circuits for predictive
coding presented in this paper will be
nuanced as more anatomical and physiological information becomes available.
The ability to compare competing models
or microcircuits—using optogenetics,
local field potentials, and electroencephalography—may be
important for refining neurobiologically informed microcircuits.
In short, many of the predictions and assumptions we have
made about the specific form of the microcircuit for predictive
coding may be testable in the near future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust and the NSF Graduate
Research Fellowship under Grant 2009090358 to A.M.B. Support was also
provided by NIH grants MH055714 (G.R.M.) and EY013588 (W.M.U.), and
NSF grant 1228535 (G.R.M and W.M.U). The authors would like to thank Julien
Vezoli, Will Penny, Dimitris Pinotsis, Stewart Shipp, Vladimir Litvak, Conrado
Bosman, Laurent Perrinet, and Henry Kennedy for helpful discussions. We
would also like to thank our reviewers for helpful comments and guidance.
REFERENCES
Alink, A., Schwiedrzik, C.M., Kohler, A., Singer, W., and Muckli, L. (2010). Stimulus predictability reduces responses in primary visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 30,
2960–2966.
Alitto, H.J., and Usrey, W.M. (2008). Origin and dynamics of extraclassical
suppression in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the macaque monkey. Neuron
57, 135–146.
Alonso, J.M. (2002). Neural connections and receptive field properties in the
primary visual cortex. Neuroscientist 8, 443–456.
Alonso, J.M., and Martinez, L.M. (1998). Functional connectivity between
simple cells and complex cells in cat striate cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 1, 395–403.
Anderson, J.C., and Martin, K.A.C. (2006). Synaptic connection from cortical
area V4 to V2 in macaque monkey. J. Comp. Neurol. 495, 709–721.

Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 707

Neuron

Perspective
Anderson, J.C., Kennedy, H., and Martin, K.A. (2011). Pathways of attention:
synaptic relationships of frontal eye field to V4, lateral intraparietal cortex,
and area 46 in macaque monkey. J. Neurosci. 31, 10872–10881.
Armstrong, K.M., Schafer, R.J., Chang, M.H., and Moore, T. (2012). Attention
and action in the frontal eye field. In The Neuroscience of Attention: Attentional
Control and Selection, G.R. Mangun, ed. (New York: Oxford University Press),
pp. 151–166.
Arnal, L.H., Wyart, V., and Giraud, A.L. (2011). Transitions in neural oscillations
reflect prediction errors generated in audiovisual speech. Nat. Neurosci. 14,
797–801.
Atick, J.J. (2011). Could information theory provide an ecological theory of
sensory processing? Network 22, 4–44.
Attneave, F. (1954). Some informational aspects of visual perception. Psychol.
Rev. 61, 183–193.
Bair, W., Cavanaugh, J.R., and Movshon, J.A. (2003). Time course and timedistance relationships for surround suppression in macaque V1 neurons. J.
Neurosci. 23, 7690–7701.
Barcelo´, F., Suwazono, S., and Knight, R.T. (2000). Prefrontal modulation of
visual processing in humans. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 399–403.
Barlow, H.B. (1961). Possible principles underlying the transformations of
sensory messages. In Sensory Communication, W.A. Rosenblith, ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), pp. 217–234.
Barone, P., Batardiere, A., Knoblauch, K., and Kennedy, H. (2000). Laminar
distribution of neurons in extrastriate areas projecting to visual areas V1 and
V4 correlates with the hierarchical rank and indicates the operation of
a distance rule. J. Neurosci. 20, 3263–3281.
Berkes, P., Orba´n, G., Lengyel, M., and Fiser, J. (2011). Spontaneous cortical
activity reveals hallmarks of an optimal internal model of the environment.
Science 331, 83–87.
Bollimunta, A., Mo, J., Schroeder, C.E., and Ding, M. (2011). Neuronal mechanisms and attentional modulation of corticothalamic a oscillations. J. Neurosci. 31, 4935–4943.
Bosman, C.A., Schoffelen, J.-M., Brunet, N., Oostenveld, R., Bastos, A.M.,
Womelsdorf, T., Rubehn, B., Stieglitz, T., De Weerd, P., and Fries, P. (2012).
Attentional stimulus selection through selective synchronization between
monkey visual areas. Neuron 75, 875–888.
Briggs, F., and Callaway, E.M. (2005). Laminar patterns of local excitatory
input to layer 5 neurons in macaque primary visual cortex. Cereb. Cortex 15,
479–488.
Briggs, F., and Usrey, W.M. (2009). Parallel processing in the corticogeniculate
pathway of the macaque monkey. Neuron 62, 135–146.
Buchsbaum, G., and Gottschalk, A. (1983). Trichromacy, opponent colours
coding and optimum colour information transmission in the retina. Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 220, 89–113.

Canolty, R.T., Ganguly, K., Kennerley, S.W., Cadieu, C.F., Koepsell, K., Wallis,
J.D., and Carmena, J.M. (2010). Oscillatory phase coupling coordinates
anatomically dispersed functional cell assemblies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 107, 17356–17361.
Chu, Z., Galarreta, M., and Hestrin, S. (2003). Synaptic interactions of latespiking neocortical neurons in layer 1. J. Neurosci. 23, 96–102.
Covic, E.N., and Sherman, S.M. (2011). Synaptic properties of connections
between the primary and secondary auditory cortices in mice. Cereb. Cortex
21, 2425–2441.
Crick, F. (1984). Function of the thalamic reticular complex: the searchlight
hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81, 4586–4590.
Crick, F., and Koch, C. (1998). Constraints on cortical and thalamic projections: the no-strong-loops hypothesis. Nature 391, 245–250.
Dan, Y., Atick, J.J., and Reid, R.C. (1996). Efficient coding of natural scenes in
the lateral geniculate nucleus: experimental test of a computational theory.
J. Neurosci. 16, 3351–3362.
David, O., Kiebel, S.J., Harrison, L.M., Mattout, J., Kilner, J.M., and Friston,
K.J. (2006). Dynamic causal modeling of evoked responses in EEG and
MEG. Neuroimage 30, 1255–1272.
Dayan, P., Hinton, G.E., Neal, R.M., and Zemel, R.S. (1995). The Helmholtz
machine. Neural Comput. 7, 889–904.
de Kock, C.P.J., Bruno, R.M., Spors, H., and Sakmann, B. (2007). Layer- and
cell-type-specific suprathreshold stimulus representation in rat primary
somatosensory cortex. J. Physiol. 581, 139–154.
de No, L.R. (1949). Cerebral cortex: architecture, intracortical connections,
motor projections. In Physiology of the Nervous System, J.F. Fulton, ed.
(Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 288–330.
De Pasquale, R., and Sherman, S.M. (2011). Synaptic properties of corticocortical connections between the primary and secondary visual cortical areas
in the mouse. J. Neurosci. 31, 16494–16506.
Desimone, R. (1996). Neural mechanisms for visual memory and their role in
attention. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 13494–13499.
Douglas, R.J., and Martin, K.A. (1991). A functional microcircuit for cat visual
cortex. J. Physiol. 440, 735–769.
Douglas, R.J., and Martin, K.A.C. (2004). Neuronal circuits of the neocortex.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 419–451.
Douglas, R.J., Martin, K.A., and Whitteridge, D. (1989). A canonical microcircuit for neocortex. Neural Comput. 1, 480–488.
Engbert, R., Mergenthaler, K., Sinn, P., and Pikovsky, A. (2011). PNAS Plus: An
integrated model of fixational eye movements and microsaccades. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 108, E765–E770.

Buffalo, E.A., Fries, P., Landman, R., Buschman, T.J., and Desimone, R.
(2011). Laminar differences in gamma and alpha coherence in the ventral
stream. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 11262–11267.

Engel, A.K., Friston, K.J., Kelso, J.A., Ko¨nig, P., Kova´cs, I., MacDonald, A.,
Miller, E.K., Phillips, W.A., Silverstein, S.M., Tallon-Baudry, C., et al. (2010).
Coordination in behavior and cognition. In Dynamic Coordination in the Brain:
From Neurons to Mind, C. von der Malsburg, W.A. Phillips, and W. Singer, eds.
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), pp. 267–299.

Bullier, J., and Henry, G.H. (1980). Ordinal position and afferent input of
neurons in monkey striate cortex. J. Comp. Neurol. 193, 913–935.

Feldman, H., and Friston, K.J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy.
Front Hum Neurosci 4, 215.

Bullier, J., Hupe´, J.M., James, A., and Girard, P. (1996). Functional interactions
between areas V1 and V2 in the monkey. J. Physiol. Paris 90, 217–220.

Felleman, D.J., and Van Essen, D.C. (1991). Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex. Cereb. Cortex 1, 1–47.

Buschman, T.J., and Miller, E.K. (2007). Top-down versus bottom-up control
of attention in the prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices. Science 315,
1860–1862.

Fitzpatrick, D., Usrey, W.M., Schofield, B.R., and Einstein, G. (1994). The sublaminar organization of corticogeniculate neurons in layer 6 of macaque striate
cortex. Vis. Neurosci. 11, 307–315.

Buzsa´ki, G. (2010). Neural syntax: cell assemblies, synapsembles, and
readers. Neuron 68, 362–385.

Fries, P. (2005). A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication through neuronal coherence. Trends Cogn. Sci. 9, 474–480.

Callaway, E.M. (1998). Local circuits in primary visual cortex of the macaque
monkey. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 21, 47–74.

Fries, P., Reynolds, J.H., Rorie, A.E., and Desimone, R. (2001). Modulation of
oscillatory neuronal synchronization by selective visual attention. Science 291,
1560–1563.

Callaway, E.M., and Wiser, A.K. (1996). Contributions of individual layer 2-5
spiny neurons to local circuits in macaque primary visual cortex. Vis. Neurosci.
13, 907–922.

708 Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

Friston, K. (2008). Hierarchical models in the brain. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4,
e1000211.

Neuron

Perspective
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 127–138.

Hopfinger, J.B., Buonocore, M.H., and Mangun, G.R. (2000). The neural mechanisms of top-down attentional control. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 284–291.

Fujisawa, S., and Buzsa´ki, G. (2011). A 4 Hz oscillation adaptively synchronizes
prefrontal, VTA, and hippocampal activities. Neuron 72, 153–165.

Horton, J.C., and Adams, D.L. (2005). The cortical column: a structure without
a function. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 360, 837–862.

Garrido, M.I., Kilner, J.M., Kiebel, S.J., and Friston, K.J. (2007). Evoked brain
responses are generated by feedback loops. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
104, 20961–20966.

Hubel, D.H., and Wiesel, T.N. (1962). Receptive fields, binocular interaction
and functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex. J. Physiol. 160, 106–154.

Garrido, M.I., Kilner, J.M., Stephan, K.E., and Friston, K.J. (2009). The
mismatch negativity: a review of underlying mechanisms. Clin. Neurophysiol.
120, 453–463.
Gentet, L.J., Kremer, Y., Taniguchi, H., Huang, Z.J., Staiger, J.F., and Petersen, C.C.H. (2012). Unique functional properties of somatostatin-expressing GABAergic neurons in mouse barrel cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 607–612.

Hubel, D.H., and Wiesel, T.N. (1972). Laminar and columnar distribution
of geniculo-cortical fibers in the macaque monkey. J. Comp. Neurol. 146,
421–450.
Hubel, D.H., and Wiesel, T.N. (1974). Sequence regularity and geometry of
orientation columns in the monkey striate cortex. J. Comp. Neurol. 158,
267–293.

George, D., and Hawkins, J. (2009). Towards a mathematical theory of cortical
micro-circuits. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5, e1000532.

Hupe´, J.M., James, A.C., Payne, B.R., Lomber, S.G., Girard, P., and Bullier, J.
(1998). Cortical feedback improves discrimination between figure and background by V1, V2 and V3 neurons. Nature 394, 784–787.

Gilbert, C.D., and Wiesel, T.N. (1983). Functional organization of the visual
cortex. Prog. Brain Res. 58, 209–218.

Johnson, R.R., and Burkhalter, A. (1996). Microcircuitry of forward and feedback connections within rat visual cortex. J. Comp. Neurol. 368, 383–398.

Girard, P., and Bullier, J. (1989). Visual activity in area V2 during reversible inactivation of area 17 in the macaque monkey. J. Neurophysiol. 62, 1287–1302.

Johnson, R.R., and Burkhalter, A. (1997). A polysynaptic feedback circuit in rat
visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 17, 7129–7140.

Girard, P., Salin, P.A., and Bullier, J. (1991a). Visual activity in areas V3a and V3
during reversible inactivation of area V1 in the macaque monkey. J. Neurophysiol. 66, 1493–1503.

Ka¨tzel, D., Zemelman, B.V., Buetfering, C., Wo¨lfel, M., and Miesenbo¨ck, G.
(2011). The columnar and laminar organization of inhibitory connections to
neocortical excitatory cells. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 100–107.

Girard, P., Salin, P.A., and Bullier, J. (1991b). Visual activity in macaque area V4
depends on area 17 input. Neuroreport 2, 81–84.

Kay, J.W., and Phillips, W.A. (2011). Coherent Infomax as a computational goal
for neural systems. Bull. Math. Biol. 73, 344–372.

Girard, P., Salin, P.A., and Bullier, J. (1992). Response selectivity of neurons in
area MT of the macaque monkey during reversible inactivation of area V1. J.
Neurophysiol. 67, 1437–1446.

Klampfl, S., Legenstein, R., and Maass, W. (2009). Spiking neurons can learn
to solve information bottleneck problems and extract independent components. Neural Comput. 21, 911–959.

Gray, C.M., Ko¨nig, P., Engel, A.K., and Singer, W. (1989). Oscillatory
responses in cat visual cortex exhibit inter-columnar synchronization which
reflects global stimulus properties. Nature 338, 334–337.

Knight, R.T. (1984). Decreased response to novel stimuli after prefrontal
lesions in man. Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 59, 9–20.

Gregoriou, G.G., Gotts, S.J., Zhou, H., and Desimone, R. (2009). Highfrequency, long-range coupling between prefrontal and visual cortex during
attention. Science 324, 1207–1210.
Gregory, R.L. (1968). Perceptual illusions and brain models. Proc. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 171, 279–296.
Gregory, R.L. (1980). Perceptions as hypotheses. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.
B Biol. Sci. 290, 181–197.
Gwin, J.T., and Ferris, D.P. (2012). Beta- and gamma-range human lower limb
corticomuscular coherence. Front Hum Neurosci 6, 258.
Haeusler, S., and Maass, W. (2007). A statistical analysis of information-processing properties of lamina-specific cortical microcircuit models. Cereb.
Cortex 17, 149–162.
Harrison, L.M., Stephan, K.E., Rees, G., and Friston, K.J. (2007). Extra-classical receptive field effects measured in striate cortex with fMRI. Neuroimage
34, 1199–1208.
Ha¨usser, M., and Mel, B. (2003). Dendrites: bug or feature? Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 13, 372–383.
Hebb, D.O. (1949). The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological
Theory (New York: Wiley).
Helmholtz, H. (1860). Handbuch der Physiologischen Optik. English translation
(New York: Dover).
Hinton, G., and van Camp, D. (1993). Keeping neural networks simple by minimizing the description length of weights. In Proceedings of the Sixth Annual
Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT ’93), L. Pitt, ed. (New
York: ACM), pp. 5–13.
Hinton, G.E., and Zemel, R.S. (1994). Autoencoders, minimum description
length, and helmholtz free energy. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 6, J.D. Cowan, G. Tesauro, and J. Alspector, eds. (San Mateo,
CA: Morgan Kaufmann), pp. 3–10.

Knight, R.T., Scabini, D., and Woods, D.L. (1989). Prefrontal cortex gating of
auditory transmission in humans. Brain Res. 504, 338–342.
Knill, D.C., and Pouget, A. (2004). The Bayesian brain: the role of uncertainty in
neural coding and computation. Trends Neurosci. 27, 712–719.
Kok, P., Rahnev, D., Jehee, J.F., Lau, H.C., and de Lange, F.P. (2012). Attention reverses the effect of prediction in silencing sensory signals. Cereb.
Cortex 22, 2197–2206.
Lakatos, P., Karmos, G., Mehta, A.D., Ulbert, I., and Schroeder, C.E. (2008).
Entrainment of neuronal oscillations as a mechanism of attentional selection.
Science 320, 110–113.
Larkum, M.E., Nevian, T., Sandler, M., Polsky, A., and Schiller, J. (2009).
Synaptic integration in tuft dendrites of layer 5 pyramidal neurons: a new
unifying principle. Science 325, 756–760.
Lefort, S., Tomm, C., Floyd Sarria, J.-C., and Petersen, C.C.H. (2009). The
excitatory neuronal network of the C2 barrel column in mouse primary somatosensory cortex. Neuron 61, 301–316.
Linsker, R. (1990). Perceptual neural organization: some approaches based on
network models and information theory. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 257–281.
Livingstone, M.S. (1996). Oscillatory firing and interneuronal correlations in
squirrel monkey striate cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 75, 2467–2485.
London, M., and Ha¨usser, M. (2005). Dendritic computation. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 28, 503–532.
Lopes-dos-Santos, V., Conde-Ocazionez, S., Nicolelis, M.A.L., Ribeiro, S.T.,
and Tort, A.B.L. (2011). Neuronal assembly detection and cell membership
specification by principal component analysis. PLoS ONE 6, e20996.
MacKay, D.M. (1956). Automata Studies, C.E. Shannon and J. McCarthy, eds.
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univeristy Press), pp. 235–251.
Maier, A., Adams, G.K., Aura, C., and Leopold, D.A. (2010). Distinct superficial
and deep laminar domains of activity in the visual cortex during rest and stimulation. Front. Sys. Neurosci. 4, 31.

Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 709

Neuron

Perspective
Markov, N.T., Misery, P., Falchier, A., Lamy, C., Vezoli, J., Quilodran, R., Gariel,
M.A., Giroud, P., Ercsey-Ravasz, M., Pilaz, L.J., et al. (2011). Weight consistency specifies regularities of macaque cortical networks. Cereb. Cortex 21,
1254–1272.
Meirovithz, E., Ayzenshtat, I., Werner-Reiss, U., Shamir, I., and Slovin, H.
(2012). Spatiotemporal effects of microsaccades on population activity in
the visual cortex of monkeys during fixation. Cereb. Cortex 22, 294–307.

Saalmann, Y.B., Pinsk, M.A., Wang, L., Li, X., and Kastner, S. (2012). The pulvinar regulates information transmission between cortical areas based on
attention demands. Science 337, 753–756.
Sakata, S., and Harris, K.D. (2009). Laminar structure of spontaneous and
sensory-evoked population activity in auditory cortex. Neuron 64, 404–418.
Salin, P.A., and Bullier, J. (1995). Corticocortical connections in the visual
system: structure and function. Physiol. Rev. 75, 107–154.

Melzer, S., Michael, M., Caputi, A., Eliava, M., Fuchs, E.C., Whittington, M.A.,
and Monyer, H. (2012). Long-range-projecting GABAergic neurons modulate
inhibition in hippocampus and entorhinal cortex. Science 335, 1506–1510.

Sandell, J.H., and Schiller, P.H. (1982). Effect of cooling area 18 on striate
cortex cells in the squirrel monkey. J. Neurophysiol. 48, 38–48.

Meyer, T., and Olson, C.R. (2011). Statistical learning of visual transitions in
monkey inferotemporal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 19401–19406.

Sherman, S.M., and Guillery, R.W. (1998). On the actions that one nerve cell
can have on another: distinguishing ‘‘drivers’’ from ‘‘modulators’’. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 95, 7121–7126.

Meyer, H.S., Schwarz, D., Wimmer, V.C., Schmitt, A.C., Kerr, J.N.D., Sakmann, B., and Helmstaedter, M. (2011). Inhibitory interneurons in a cortical
column form hot zones of inhibition in layers 2 and 5A. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 108, 16807–16812.
Mignard, M., and Malpeli, J.G. (1991). Paths of information flow through visual
cortex. Science 251, 1249–1251.
Moran, R.J., Stephan, K.E., Kiebel, S.J., Rombach, N., O’Connor, W.T.,
Murphy, K.J., Reilly, R.B., and Friston, K.J. (2008). Bayesian estimation of
synaptic physiology from the spectral responses of neural masses. Neuroimage 42, 272–284.
Moran, R.J., Symmonds, M., Stephan, K.E., Friston, K.J., and Dolan, R.J.
(2011). An in vivo assay of synaptic function mediating human cognition.
Curr. Biol. 21, 1320–1325.

Sherman, S.M., and Guillery, R.W. (2011). Distinct functions for direct and
transthalamic corticocortical connections. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 1068–1077.
Shipp, S. (2007). Structure and function of the cerebral cortex. Curr. Biol. 17,
R443–R449.
Shlosberg, D., Amitai, Y., and Azouz, R. (2006). Time-dependent, layerspecific modulation of sensory responses mediated by neocortical layer 1.
J. Neurophysiol. 96, 3170–3182.
Sillito, A.M., Cudeiro, J., and Murphy, P.C. (1993). Orientation sensitive
elements in the corticofugal influence on centre-surround interactions in the
dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. Exp. Brain Res. 93, 6–16.
Sincich, L.C., and Horton, J.C. (2005). The circuitry of V1 and V2: integration of
color, form, and motion. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 28, 303–326.

Mountcastle, V.B. (1957). Modality and topographic properties of single
neurons of cat’s somatic sensory cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 20, 408–434.

Singer, W. (1999). Neuronal synchrony: a versatile code for the definition of
relations? Neuron 24, 49–65, 111–125.

Mountcastle, V.B. (1997). The columnar organization of the neocortex. Brain
120, 701–722.

Singer, W., Engel, A.K., Kreiter, A.K., Munk, M.H., Neuenschwander, S., and
Roelfsema, P.R. (1997). Neuronal assemblies: necessity, signature and detectability. Trends Cogn. Sci. 1, 252–261.

Mumford, D. (1992). On the computational architecture of the neocortex. II.
The role of cortico-cortical loops. Biol. Cybern. 66, 241–251.
Murphy, P.C., and Sillito, A.M. (1987). Corticofugal feedback influences the
generation of length tuning in the visual pathway. Nature 329, 727–729.
Murray, S.O., Kersten, D., Olshausen, B.A., Schrater, P., and Woods, D.L.
(2002). Shape perception reduces activity in human primary visual cortex.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 15164–15169.
Murray, S.O., Olman, C.A., and Kersten, D. (2006). Spatially specific FMRI
repetition effects in human visual cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 95, 2439–2445.
Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive Psychology (New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts).
Olsen, S.R., Bortone, D.S., Adesnik, H., and Scanziani, M. (2012). Gain control
by layer six in cortical circuits of vision. Nature 483, 47–52.
Raizada, R.D.S., and Grossberg, S. (2003). Towards a theory of the laminar
architecture of cerebral cortex: computational clues from the visual system.
Cereb. Cortex 13, 100–113.
Rao, R.P., and Ballard, D.H. (1999). Predictive coding in the visual cortex:
a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects.
Nat. Neurosci. 2, 79–87.
Roopun, A.K., Kramer, M.A., Carracedo, L.M., Kaiser, M., Davies, C.H., Traub,
R.D., Kopell, N.J., and Whittington, M.A. (2008). Period concatenation underlies interactions between gamma and beta rhythms in neocortex. Front. Cell
Neurosci. 2, 1.

Spratling, M.W. (2008). Reconciling predictive coding and biased competition
models of cortical function. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 2, 4.
Srinivasan, M.V., Laughlin, S.B., and Dubs, A. (1982). Predictive coding: a fresh
view of inhibition in the retina. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 216, 427–459.
Summerfield, C., Trittschuh, E.H., Monti, J.M., Mesulam, M.-M., and Egner, T.
(2008). Neural repetition suppression reflects fulfilled perceptual expectations.
Nat. Neurosci. 11, 1004–1006.
Summerfield, C., Wyart, V., Johnen, V.M., and de Gardelle, V. (2011). Human
scalp electroencephalography reveals that repetition suppression varies with
expectation. Front Hum Neurosci 5, 67.
Theyel, B.B., Llano, D.A., and Sherman, S.M. (2010). The corticothalamocortical circuit drives higher-order cortex in the mouse. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 84–88.
Thomson, A.M., and Bannister, A.P. (2003). Interlaminar connections in the
neocortex. Cereb. Cortex 13, 5–14.
Thomson, A.M., West, D.C., Wang, Y., and Bannister, A.P. (2002). Synaptic
connections and small circuits involving excitatory and inhibitory neurons in
layers 2-5 of adult rat and cat neocortex: triple intracellular recordings and biocytin labelling in vitro. Cereb. Cortex 12, 936–953.
Todorovic, A., van Ede, F., Maris, E., and de Lange, F.P. (2011). Prior expectation mediates neural adaptation to repeated sounds in the auditory cortex:
an MEG study. J. Neurosci. 31, 9118–9123.
Ullman, S. (1995). Sequence seeking and counter streams: a computational
model for bidirectional information flow in the visual cortex. Cereb. Cortex 5,
1–11.

Roopun, A.K., Middleton, S.J., Cunningham, M.O., LeBeau, F.E., Bibbig, A.,
Whittington, M.A., and Traub, R.D. (2006). A beta2-frequency (20-30 Hz) oscillation in nonsynaptic networks of somatosensory cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 103, 15646–15650.

Usrey, W.M., and Fitzpatrick, D. (1996). Specificity in the axonal connections of
layer VI neurons in tree shrew striate cortex: evidence for distinct granular and
supragranular systems. J. Neurosci. 16, 1203–1218.

Saalmann, Y.B., Pigarev, I.N., and Vidyasagar, T.R. (2007). Neural mechanisms of visual attention: how top-down feedback highlights relevant locations. Science 316, 1612–1615.

Varela, F., Lachaux, J.P., Rodriguez, E., and Martinerie, J. (2001). The brainweb: phase synchronization and large-scale integration. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
2, 229–239.

710 Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc.

Neuron

Perspective
Vezoli, J., Falchier, A., Jouve, B., Knoblauch, K., Young, M., and Kennedy, H.
(2004). Quantitative analysis of connectivity in the visual cortex: extracting
function from structure. Neuroscientist 10, 476–482.
Vicente, R., Gollo, L.L., Mirasso, C.R., Fischer, I., and Pipa, G. (2008). Dynamical relaying can yield zero time lag neuronal synchrony despite long conduction delays. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 17157–17162.
Wacongne, C., Labyt, E., van Wassenhove, V., Bekinschtein, T., Naccache, L.,
and Dehaene, S. (2011). Evidence for a hierarchy of predictions and prediction
errors in human cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 20754–20759.
Wang, X.-J. (2010). Neurophysiological and computational principles of
cortical rhythms in cognition. Physiol. Rev. 90, 1195–1268.
Weiler, N., Wood, L., Yu, J., Solla, S.A., and Shepherd, G.M.G. (2008). Topdown laminar organization of the excitatory network in motor cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 360–366.
Wozny, C., and Williams, S.R. (2011). Specificity of synaptic connectivity
between layer 1 inhibitory interneurons and layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons in
the rat neocortex. Cereb. Cortex 21, 1818–1826.

Wurtz, R.H., McAlonan, K., Cavanaugh, J., and Berman, R.A. (2011). Thalamic
pathways for active vision. Trends Cogn. Sci. (Regul. Ed.) 15, 177–184.
Wyart, V., Nobre, A.C., and Summerfield, C. (2012). Dissociable prior influences of signal probability and relevance on visual contrast sensitivity. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 3593–3598.
Yamaguchi, S., and Knight, R.T. (1990). Gating of somatosensory input by
human prefrontal cortex. Brain Res. 521, 281–288.
Yoshimura, Y., and Callaway, E.M. (2005). Fine-scale specificity of cortical
networks depends on inhibitory cell type and connectivity. Nat. Neurosci. 8,
1552–1559.
Yuille, A., and Kersten, D. (2006). Vision as Bayesian inference: analysis by
synthesis? Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 301–308.
Zeki, S.M. (1978). The cortical projections of foveal striate cortex in the rhesus
monkey. J. Physiol. 277, 227–244.
Zeki, S., and Shipp, S. (1988). The functional logic of cortical connections.
Nature 335, 311–317.

Neuron 76, November 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Inc. 711

