J Neurophysiol 99: 2291–2304, 2008.
First published February 20, 2008; doi:10.1152/jn.01206.2007.

Proprioceptive and Cutaneous Representations in the Rat Ventral
Posterolateral Thalamus
Joseph T. Francis,1,2,3,* Shaohua Xu,1,2,* and John K. Chapin1,2,3
1

Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, 2Program in Neural and Behavioral Science, and 3Program in Biomedical Engineering,
State University of New York Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York
Submitted 29 October 2007; accepted in final form 18 February 2008

Francis JT, Xu S, Chapin JK. Proprioceptive and cutaneous representations in the rat ventral posterolateral thalamus. J Neurophysiol
99: 2291–2304, 2008. First published February 20, 2008;
doi:10.1152/jn.01206.2007. Determining how and where proprioceptive information is represented in the rat ventral posterolateral (VPL)
is important in allowing us to further investigate how this sense is
utilized during motor control and learning. Here we demonstrate using
electrophysiological techniques that the rostral portion of the rat VPL
nucleus (rVPL, Ϫ2 to Ϫ2.5 mm bregma) carries a large amount of
proprioceptive information. Caudal to this region is a zone where the
cutaneous receptive fields are focal (mVPL for middle VPL, Ϫ2.5 to
Ϫ3.2 mm bregma) with a fine topographic map of the fore- and
hindlimbs. The forepaw is represented with digit 1 medial and each
subsequent digit increasingly lateral, all of which are dorsal to the
pads. The caudal VPL (cVPL, Ϫ3.2 to Ϫ4.0 mm bregma) has broad
receptive fields and is the target of lamina 1 and lamina 2, as well as
the dorsal column nuclei, and may represent the flow of nociceptive
information through the VPL. Thus we propose that the VPL may be
thought of as three subnuclei—the rostral, middle, and caudal VPL—
each carrying preferentially a different modality of information. This
pattern of information flow through the rat VPL is similar, although
apparently rotated, to that of many primates, indicating that these
regions in the rat (rVPL, mVPL, and cVPL) have become further
differentiated in primates where they are seen as separate nuclei (VPS,
VPL, and VPI/VMpo).

INTRODUCTION

Sensory feedback is essential for an animal to control its
own movements. Both vision and proprioception are considered to be important for motor learning and performance in
human and nonhuman primates (Ghez and Sainburg 1995;
Gordon et al. 1995; Graziano 1999; Saunders and Knill 2003).
However, many animals including rodents have their eyes
situated such that they provide little information about limb
positions. Thus it is plausible that such animals depend more
heavily on proprioception, tactile, and other sensory modalities
while moving their limbs during locomotion or while manipulating food items (Ballermann et al. 2001; Doetsch et al. 1988;
Whishaw and Tomie 1989). Surprisingly little is known about
the processing of proprioceptive information within the rat
ventral posterolateral (VPL) thalamus, and there has been some
debate among researchers in the past as to the topography of
the cutaneous representation within this nucleus. Earlier work
by a host of researchers describing either the electrophysiolog* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: J. T. Francis,
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, SUNY Downstate Medical
Center, 450 Clarkson Ave., Box 31, Brooklyn, NY 11203 (E-mail: joe.
francis@downstate.edu).
www.jn.org

ical response properties (Angel and Clarke 1975; Davidson
1965; Emmers 1965) or thalamocortical connections (Fabri and
Burton 1991) of the rat VPL delineated the general cutaneous
topographic representation (Price 1995; Tracey and Waite
1995). Results from these researchers have differed to some
degree, indicating the need for further study. It has been shown
that projections from lamina I and lamina II of the rat spinal
cord at the level of C7 project to the caudal portion of the VPL
(Gauriau and Bernard 2004). Lund and Webster have described
two pathways from the spinal cord to the VP (ventroposterior
nucleus, comprised of VPM and VPL), with one projecting to
the caudal portion and the other to the rostral portion of the VP
(Lund and Webster 1967a,b). They suggested that the middle
portion of the VP received most of its projections from the
dorsal column nuclei. Based on electrophysiological experimentation Emmers (1965) suggested that the caudal portion of
the VP had responses that were less focal and bilateral compared with the rostral portion that had contralateral focal
receptive fields. He named these regions S2 and S1, respectively. This segregation of pathways into the VP and differences in response properties suggest that the VP is modular and
may be divided into subnuclei. In the work presented here we
have used electrophysiological techniques to map out neural
responses in the VPL to both cutaneous and proprioceptive
peripheral stimulation. Here we present results from this work
and discuss the relation between the rat VPL and other mammalian species.
METHODS

Animal preparation
All animal procedures were approved by SUNY Downstate Medical Center IACUC and conformed to National Institutes of Health
guidelines. Female Long–Evans rats (Charles River Laboratories,
Wilmington, MA), weighing between 250 and 450 g, were anesthetized with isoflurane in preparation for an intraperitoneal injection of
pentobarbital (50 mg/kg), at which time administration of isoflurane
was stopped. Atropine sulfate (0.05 mg/kg, intramuscular) was administered to reduce bronchial secretions. In addition we administered
dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg) to prevent swelling of the brain. Once a
surgical level of anesthesia was obtained, as determined by the lack of
any withdrawal reflex to a painful foot pinch, the rat was mounted
onto a stereotaxic device (Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA). Supplemental injections of pentobarbital (1/4 to 1/3 of initial dosage) were
given as needed. As a further precaution an isoflurane system was
used to keep the animal at a surgical level of anesthesia in case the
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment
of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement”
in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

0022-3077/08 $8.00 Copyright © 2008 The American Physiological Society

2291

2292

J. T. FRANCIS, S. XU, AND J. K. CHAPIN

animal became too light, at which time we administered more pentobarbital. Once the animal’s level of anesthesia was secure the
isoflurane was discontinued. The animal was placed on a heating pad
that was kept at or near 38°C. We did not notice any changes in the
stability of the animal preparation over the course of a typical
experiment, which was about 5– 8 h. A craniotomy was performed at
the left hemisphere, exposing a portion of the cortex starting at
bregma and extending caudally 5 mm. The mediolateral extent was
about 4.5 mm starting at the midline. The bregma and lambda
positions were measured and the animal’s snout positioned such that
the two landmarks lay in the same plane parallel to the surface of
the stereotaxic floor. This arrangement is the same as that used in the
Paxinos and Watson (1998) atlas. After this initial study was conducted and our somatotopic mapping of the VPL was complete we
conducted five more experiments, using urethane (1.2 g/kg) as the
main anesthetic, testing the accuracy of our maps. A second aim of
these latter experiments was to make electrolytic lesions in the
separate VPL regions and obtain histology for comparison.
Multiple penetrations were made during each experiment using
either a single tungsten electrode (impedance 10 M⍀) or a concentric
bipolar electrode (impedance 5 M⍀; FHC, Bowdoinham, ME). The
electrode was maneuvered using a micromanipulator (Kopf Instruments). The signal was passed from the electrode to a ϫ1,000
amplifier with band-pass filtering from 100 Hz to 9 kHz (MAP
system; Plexon, Dallas, TX). This signal was passed to an oscilloscope and an audio amplifier that allowed us to hear and see the
multiunit responses to cutaneous and proprioceptive stimulation. We
explored an area of the thalamus extending from Ϫ1.8 to Ϫ4 mm
rostrocaudally and 1.8 to 4.0 mm mediolaterally. At the end of each
experiment animals were killed with isoflurane gas, except for the five
rats used for histological purposes (see description under Histology).

Proprioceptive mapping
In an effort to keep cutaneous stimulation to a minimum we
removed the hairy skin from the right forelimb extending from above
the shoulder down to the wrist (n ϭ 14). The skin was removed only
after a preliminary cutaneous mapping of the forearm region. The skin
of the hand was left intact and cutaneous stimulation of it aided in
determining our electrode position in the VPL based on our cutaneous
mapping (see following text). Once the paw’s receptive field was
obtained and putative proprioceptive activity found, the hand was
injected with copious amounts of lidocaine, which fully extinguished
neural responses due to cutaneous stimulation of the paw. We found
that this level of local anesthesia required injecting the hand in several
sites on the dorsal, lateral, and ventral sides.
Both mechanical and electrical stimulation were used in determining the receptive fields of muscles and joints. First, palpation was used
to determine the general areas that produced neural responses. If the
neural activity appeared to be in response to muscle receptors then a
moist cotton swab was used to apply light, moderate, or deep pressure
and tapping in an attempt to elucidate the individual muscles that
made up the receptive field. It was often helpful to stretch and relax
the muscles by manipulating the joints to determine whether the
receptive field became more sensitive while the muscle was stretched
than when it was relaxed, as would be expected if the neural activity
were due to muscle spindles. It is important to note that we do not seek
to make claims about the types of receptors that produced the activity,
but rather describe the types of stimuli that caused the response. While
mapping the muscles and joints via palpation and manipulation it was
important to isolate pressure and movement to the joint or muscle that
we were testing because movement of a joint affects a large number
of muscles that in turn act on other joints. Therefore we often used
forceps to fix one joint while working on the muscles distal to it. We
found it very difficult to isolate the receptive field to individual
muscles with the muscles attached and therefore describe our results
on the basis of general locations such as dorsal forearm rather than
J Neurophysiol • VOL

specifying individual muscles so as not to overstate our accuracy in
this regard. During these experiments the muscles were kept moist by
periodically applying warm Ringer solution.

Cutaneous mapping
During our cutaneous mapping we used similar types of stimuli that
others have used in the past such as light touch that just moves the
hairs of the fur, touch that is strong enough to elicit skin receptors
without causing muscle stimulation, and deep palpations strong
enough to stimulate muscle spindles. We also manipulated the joints
during these experiments to supplement our proprioceptive mapping.
In our early experiments (n ϭ 7) we sampled a large area of the
thalamus to obtain a general map of the entire body representation
with no bias. Subsequently, we concentrated on areas of the thalamus
that contained the forelimb representation. During these later experiments we still collected a great deal of information on the hindlimb as
well as the body representation, which is reflected in RESULTS.
In an effort to briefly describe neuronal latencies we used an
electrically driven (1 Hz) mechanical stimulator (MFE R4-155) to
elicit responses within a neuron’s receptive field. This stimulator
produced a tapping motion that was applied to the skin via a wooden
shaft. A precision timer supplied a timing pulse for both the mechanical stimulator as well as to our recording system (MAP system,
Plexon), which allowed us to easily produce peristimulus time histograms (PSTHs) using Nex software (Nex Technologies, Dallas, TX).

Histology
In a subset of five experiments we made electrolytic lesions along
our electrode tracks; specifically, we marked the border of the VPL,
that is we made lesions when we first encountered the VPL and when
we were leaving it as determined via our electrophysiological mapping of receptive fields guided by our stereotaxic measures and an
atlas of the rat brain (Paxinos and Watson 1998). Electrolytic lesions
were made by passing 15 ␮A of current using monopolar stimulation
with a biphasic square-wave input (20 s each phase). After the
mapping experiment was complete these five animals were killed with
an overdose of pentobarbital (100 mg/kg) and then perfused transcardially with 0.5 L of Ringer solution followed by 0.5 L of 4%
paraformaldehyde. The brains were removed and stored in cold 4%
paraformaldehyde for Ն1 wk. The formalin-fixed brains were placed
in frozen tissue-embedding media (SH75-125D, Fisher Scientific) and
frozen with liquid nitrogen overnight. The frozen brains were then
blocked in the desired orientation and cut into 60-␮m sections with a
microtome. These sections were mounted on slides, dried, and stained
with cresyl violet stain.
RESULTS

We made a total of 327 penetrations in the left hemisphere
from 35 female Long–Evans rats with an average age of 5.61
mo, weight of 319 g, and lambda– bregma distance of 8.77 mm.
In 14 experiments we removed the skin from the right forearm
and concentrated on proprioception with a total of 137 penetrations. In the remaining 21 experiments we mapped primarily
the cutaneous receptive fields on the forepaw, but gathered data
on the whole body as well as on proprioception of the intact
forelimb with a total of 190 penetrations.
Cutaneous receptive field size varies along
the rostrocaudal axis
We found that the size of the receptive fields (RFs) changed
substantially as one moves along the rostrocaudal axis of the
VPL. It should be noted that this difference in RF size is most

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

ORGANIZATION OF THE RAT VPL THALAMUS

obvious when looking at the fore- and hindpaws because the
RFs on the body and limbs are generally broad. Neurons within
the rostral and caudal VPL regions (rVPL and cVPL, respectively) usually have large diffuse RFs. Typical RFs in these
areas include several digits, the whole palm, or even the whole
paw. In contrast, RFs in the middle portion (mVPL) have small
and focal RFs. Typical RFs in this area are restricted to a single
digit, a single palmar pad, or an individual digit segment.
In Fig. 1 we have shaded typical RFs found on the forepaw
from the three VPL regions (gray area, Fig. 1, D–F), as well as
PSTHs centered on an approximately 1-Hz mechanical stimulus at the center of the RF (see METHODS). Each inset in Fig. 1
depicts the location of the neuron in the horizontal plane with
the distance in millimeters from bregma, lateral to the midline,
and depth from the pial surface. These three cells had approximately the same response latency of 7 ms. We did not test the

A

D

B

E

2293

latencies of most neurons and thus do not wish to make any
claims as to the probabilities of cellular latencies within the
three VPL regions, but rather that one can find cells in each of
the three VPL regions with short latencies. Each cell in Fig. 1
was taken from one experiment where several cells from each
region were found to have similar short latencies. Thus both
cells with small and large receptive fields can have the same
short latency contrary to the results reported by Angel and
Clarke (1975).
Results from an experiment in which we concentrated our
electrode penetrations along a sagittal plane about 2.8 mm
from the midline are represented in Fig. 2. Receptive fields on
the body are represented by solid squares, with the forelimb
represented by solid circles and the hindlimb by solid triangles.
One can see from this figure that there is a shift in the RF size
and modality as one travels along the rostrocaudal axis, which
is represented by the three differentially shaded regions. At this
lateral extent the rVPL is carrying mostly proprioceptive information from the hindlimb, as can be seen from the RFs
encountered in our rostral-most electrode penetration (see Fig.
2). The first RF is to ankle extension as is indicated by the bold
arrow, where arrows indicate the direction of movement of the
nearest joint that increased the neural response. The capital (T)
indicates that the neural response was tonic. We found a large
number of RFs in the rVPL that responded in a tonic fashion
compared with the mVPL. Notice that the RFs in the mVPL
region are focal and in this sagittal plane represent the forepaw.
Moving to the cVPL the RFs once again become large as they
were in the rVPL, although in the cVPL, they are cutaneous in
nature.
Trends in cutaneous RFs of the mVPL

C

F

FIG. 1. The size of receptive fields at different ventral posterolateral (VPL)
regions. Peristimulus time histograms (PSTHs) (A–C) and corresponding
receptive fields (D–F) for 3 neurons recorded in rostral (A, D), middle (B, E),
and caudal (C, F) VPL. Each PSTH is centered on a mechanical stimulation
delivered at 1 Hz (see METHODS). The recording electrode position is shown in
a horizontal plane of VP (inset); the coordinates for each cell with respect to
bregma, lateral displacement from the midline, and depth from the pial surface
(in millimeters) are recorded below the inset. M, medial; R, rostral.

J Neurophysiol • VOL

In Fig. 3 we describe the results from a typical experiment
mapping the mVPL (Ϫ2.7 mm from bregma). On the left side
of this figure we have plotted information regarding the location of six electrode tracks with the positions at which data
were obtained. Positions where forepaw RFs were found are
marked with a filled circle and are labeled with numbers
corresponding to their RFs seen within the drawing of the
mVPL. Filled circles without a number have a similar RF to the
region numbered above it in the same electrode path. Thus
we can see in Fig. 3 that the most medial penetration has an
RF on the vestigial digit 1 for the first three electrode
positions within the mVPL. Subsequently, as one goes
deeper the RF moves to the pad adjacent to digit 1.
Several trends can be seen in Fig. 3. First, as one moves
from the medial to the lateral mVPL the RFs move in the same
manner, that is from the digit 1 (medial) side of the paw to digit
5 (lateral) side. The second clear trend is that as one goes
deeper within the thalamus the RFs move from the digits to the
pads. We found that the claws have a strong representation, as
do the hairs that cover the claws represented by RF 7 in Fig. 3.
In the mVPL we generally found that as we moved from the
surface of the cortex through the mVPL RFs first appear on the
whiskers (VPM), second on the jaw, and then either suddenly
the RFs jumped to the forepaw, or in more lateral portions of
the mVPL we first encountered a brief period of forelimb
before it jumped to the hindlimb, as can be seen in Fig. 3 (RFs
21–24) and our summary in Fig. 6B. It is clear from Figs. 2, 3,
6, and 7 that the surfaces used for tactile exploration are more

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

2294

J. T. FRANCIS, S. XU, AND J. K. CHAPIN

Distance from Bregma (mm)
-4.0

-3.0

-2.0

3(T)

Sagittal Plane
(Midline 2.8 mm)
Dorsal

Depth from Pial Surface (mm)

5.0

4
1
5

Rostral

23

6.0

22

20

13
14
15

24

16

19

cVPL

3

9

7

rVPL

11
12

4

Body
Forelimb
Hindlimb
Fore/hindlimb
No Response 5
at body/limb

mVPL

7.0

12(T)

22

23

14

1(T)

6

10

18
21

2

8

17

2(T)

13

13

14

8

17

6(T)

7(T)

15

FIG. 2. Results from a typical experiment on the
sagittal plane 2.8 mm from the midline. Coordinate
map on the top left depicts the positions where data
were taken, with different symbols standing for
receptive field (RF) regions on the body. The
approximate partitions of rostral (rVPL), middle
(mVPL), and caudal (cVPL) VPL regions are indicated by 3 shaded areas: dark gray, gray, and light
gray, respectively. Each area grouped RFs of similar
response characteristics. Numbers represent RFs depicted in the figure. Filled symbols without a number have a similar RF as the numbered symbols
above them. The boundary of VPL is depicted with
the dashed line. The movement direction of joints is
indicated by adjacent symbols (i.e., arrows, etc.;
see key).

8

16

9(T)

24
10

20
Lateral extention
(T) Tonic Response

21
Direction of Joint movement

18

11(T)

19

heavily represented than areas such as the dorsal surface of the
paw. It should be noted that the guard hairs are also well
represented, and cellular responses to the slightest movement
of these two hairs caused impressive neural responses as if one
was moving a whisker. It is possible that rats use these guard
hairs as whiskers for the forelimb.
Mapping the sagittal plane (Fig. 2) revealed additional RF
trends in the mVPL. First, in the dorsoventral aspect, we still
encountered the digits first then the palmar pads (RFs 13 to 16
in Fig. 2). Second, in the rostrocaudal aspect, lateral digits were
represented in a more rostral portion of mVPL (RF 8 vs. RF 13
in Fig. 2). The fact that lateral digits are represented more
rostrally in the sagittal plane of Fig. 2, whereas in the coronal
plane the representation maintains a digit 1 to digit 5 arrangement in the mediolateral axis, indicates the forepaw representation follows the VPL curvature (Fig. 7A).
Proprioception and the rVPL
The rostral portion of the VPL (rVPL, about Ϫ2.0 to Ϫ2.5
mm from bregma) is responsive to both cutaneous and propriJ Neurophysiol • VOL

oceptive stimulation. In general, the receptive fields on the
forepaw appear broad and are often associated with movement
of the digit joints. Of course as one moves the digit joints, the
muscles and tendons of the forearm and paw are moved as
well. We have found a disproportionately large forearm representation in the rVPL compared with the upper arm. Thus the
triceps, biceps, and muscles of the shoulder have a smaller
representation than the forearm muscles, which may be due
simply to the fact that there are more muscles in the forearm.
Figures 4 and 5 represent data taken from a typical experiment mapping the rVPL. In this experiment we have removed
the skin of the forearm and have filled the forepaw with
lidocaine (see METHODS) to limit any cutaneous activity. It
should be noted that we found similar results with the intact
forelimb; thus any thalamic reorganization that may have
occurred due to the change in sensory input was not substantial
enough to change the general patterns we subsequently
describe. Filled circles in Figs. 4 and 5 represent positions
where we obtained RFs on the forelimb, filled triangles areas
where the RFs were on the hindlimb, and filled squares RFs on

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

ORGANIZATION OF THE RAT VPL THALAMUS

2295

Distance from Midline (mm)

Depth from Pial Surface (mm)

3.4

3.2

5.4

21

5.6

22

3.0

2.8

2.6

2.4

Coronal Plane
(Bregma -2.7mm)

2.0

1
15

12,16

11

17

23

12

5

17

1

7

18

3

19

8

20 14

19

1

9

14
5

6.6

2
6
10

4

13

6.4

2

10

7

6

6.8

4

18

24

6.2

3

13
Medial

16

7
8

9

11

Dorsal

5.8
6.0

2.2

11,15

8
Forepaw/limb
Hindpaw
No Response at Body/limb

FIG. 3. Results from a typical mapping
experiment of the middle VPL (Ϫ2.7 mm
from bregma). Coordinate map in the top left
depicts the positions where data were taken,
with different symbols standing for RF regions on the body. Numbers represent RFs
depicted in the figure. RFs and their corresponding symbols are color-coded to better
visualize the multiple overlapping of adjacent fields. Filled symbols without a number
have a similar RF as the numbered symbols
above them. The boundary of VPL is depicted with the dashed line.

12,16

3
4

24

23

17
21

1

20

23

22
(Guard Hair)

the body. The positions of each point are given in the mediolateral direction as well as the depth from the pial surface.
These coronal planes were approximately Ϫ2.3 mm from
bregma for Fig. 4 and Ϫ2.5 mm for Fig. 5. Because there was
no skin on the forearm these RFs are proprioceptive in nature.
All arrows indicate movement of the closest joint in the
direction that caused neural activity. Curved arrows indicate
that the RF was turning to the respective joint in the direction
indicated. Thus we can see in our most medial penetration in
Fig. 4 an RF is to much of the dorsal forelimb. In all descriptions we assume the rat to be in a position such that it is lying
down with the forelimbs out to the side, palm surface facing
down. This first RF also included elbow extension as is
indicated by the bold arrow pointing down. In the second most
medial penetration the second RF (3) is to electrical stimulation
of the biceps indicated by an “E”. This RF also included
mechanical stimulation to the shoulder and dorsal forelimb as
well as to elbow flexion. As we moved the electrode deeper the
RF included turning the paw either counterclockwise or clockwise. We use similar conventions in both Figs. 4 and 5, as the
keys on each figure describe.
In our most medial penetration in Fig. 5 we first hit the upper
arm representation and found RFs to turning the shoulder joint
J Neurophysiol • VOL

away from the head as is represented by the curved arrow. The
cells encountered in this penetration also responded to extending the elbow, as well as to lifting the arm up (in the direction
out of the page: J) so as to stretch the pectorals. The shaded
areas seen in Figs. 4 and 5 represent RFs to mechanical
stimulation (M) unless otherwise specified by an E (electrical
stimulation), where the electrical stimulation was just sufficient
to cause a small muscle contraction. These figures demonstrate
that generally the RFs in this area were to several muscles and
joints. The finding that the muscle receptive fields are not in an
obvious somatotopic organization, other than the general trend
of the forelimb being medial to the hindlimb, is similar to that
found in the cortical proprioceptive representation (Gioanni
1987). Receptive fields for the wrist and forearm are heavily
overlapped, as one would expect, because movement of the
wrist causes the attached forearm muscles to stretch or contract
leading to muscle spindle activation. We found cells that
appeared to encode position of the wrist as they responded in
a tonic fashion with an increase in frequency as the wrist was
pushed in one direction and decreased their activity in the
opposing direction. There were a larger number of RFs that
responded to fast movements of the wrist while still indicating
direction because they would respond to fast movements of the

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

2296

J. T. FRANCIS, S. XU, AND J. K. CHAPIN

FIG. 4. Results from a typical mapping experiment of the rostral VPL (Ϫ2.3 mm from bregma;
skin was removed from forelimb and the forepaw
was injected with lidocaine). Coordinate map on the
top left depicts the positions where data were taken,
with different symbols standing for RF regions on
the body. Numbers represent RFs depicted on the
bottom right of the figure. Filled symbols without a
number have a similar RF as the numbered symbols
above them. The boundary of VPL is depicted with
a dashed line. The shaded areas depict the mechanical touch unless indicted with an “E” (electrical
stimulation). The movement direction of joints is
indicated by adjacent symbols (i.e., arrows, etc.; see
the keys in the figure).

wrist in only one direction. Such RFs were also found in
abundance for the elbow joint and, to a lesser extent, for the
shoulder. To further determine whether there is a musculotopy
in the rat VPL it will be necessary to detach individual muscles
and determine the RFs in such a preparation. It should be noted
that many of the unfilled circles seen in Fig. 5 within the
boundary of the VPL most certainly had receptive fields on the
forepaw, which has been injected with lidocaine, or represent cutaneous portions of the forelimb skin that has been
removed. Note that the number of such unfilled circles is
greater at the level of Ϫ2.5 mm from bregma compared with
Ϫ2.3 mm from bregma, indicating the transition into the
cutaneous mVPL.
Summary of the VPL somatotopy
Figures 6 and 7 provide an overview of our results taken
from all 35 experiments including 327 penetrations. In Fig. 6A
we have a summery of the rVPL results indicating the major
trends we found with the body represented in the dorsolateral
J Neurophysiol • VOL

portion of the rVPL with the hindlimb and hindpaw situated
below it. Medial to the hindlimb is the forelimb and forepaw.
Because we did not find a reproducible musculotopy beyond
the major trends presented earlier in Figs. 4 and 5, we have
simply labeled the regions where the different limbs are represented. The representation of the forepaw digits occupies an
island of rVPL located in the mediodorsal rVPL surrounded by
the forelimb muscles.
Figure 6B depicts the average somatotopy from the mVPL
presented in the coronal plane at the level of Ϫ2.7 mm from
bregma. All of the trends previously mentioned for the mVPL
can be seen clearly in this figure. In addition, one can see the
general representation of the hindlimb as well as the body and
tail. Notice that the forepaw and hindpaw have disproportionately large representations compared with the rest of the
respective limbs, with the digits represented dorsal to the pads
in both the fore- and hindpaws. The representation of the hindpaw
is similar to that of the forepaw in that digit 1 is medial with
subsequently more lateral digits situated increasingly lateral

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

ORGANIZATION OF THE RAT VPL THALAMUS

2297

FIG. 5. Results from a typical mapping experiment of the rostral VPL (Ϫ2.5 mm from bregma;
skin was removed from forelimb and the forepaw
was injected with lidocaine). Coordinate map on the
top left depicts the positions where data were taken,
with different symbols standing for RF regions in
the body. Numbers represent RFs depicted on the
bottom right of the figure. Filled symbols without a
number have a similar RF as the numbered symbols
above them. The boundary of VPL is depicted with
the dashed line. The shaded areas depict the mechanical touch unless indicted with an “E” (electrical
stimulation). The movement direction of joints is
indicated by adjacent symbols (i.e., arrows, etc.; see
the keys in the figure).

within the mVPL, although the hindpaw representation appears
to be smaller than that of the forepaw.
In Fig. 7A we describe the VPL at the horizontal level of
Ϫ6.0 mm from pial surface. At this depth most of the VPL
carries information on the fore- and hindpaws. The digits of the
forepaw follow the curvature of the VPL while keeping their
mediolateral organization. Due to this curvature one can imagine the order of RFs in the sagittal plane may jump from one
digit to a more medial one as one goes further from bregma;
this can be seen in Fig. 7B, which represents the somatotopy of
the VPL displayed in a sagittal plane 2.8 mm from the midline.
After we completed making the map seen in Figs. 6 and 7 we
conducted another set of experiments to test our map as well as
to make electrolytic lesions in the different VPL subnuclei and
to collect histological sections of these regions. In Fig. 8 we
have two typical examples of the VPL in the sagittal (A–B) and
coronal (C–D) planes. We have made lesions at the border of
the VPL; that is, we made our first lesion in each electrode
track when we found the first somatosensory receptive field on
the body, limbs, or paws. This was often marked by a clear
J Neurophysiol • VOL

transition of receptive fields from whiskers to lower jaw and
finally to limbs, as the electrode traveled from VPM to VPL.
We made a second lesion in each track as we were leaving the
VPL, which was evident as the neural responses, RFs, would
become quieter and less robust and finally disappear. The RFs
were as expected given the maps in Figs. 6 and 7. Based on our
electrophysiological recordings and lesions we have drawn in
the approximate borders of the VPM and VPL. We did not find
any obvious differences between the VPL regions using cresyl
violet stain, although this was not a focus of this work. Further
histological analysis will be needed to determine whether these
different VPL regions (rVPL, mVPL, and cVPL) have obvious
histological distinctions and borders.
DISCUSSION

We have determined that the ventral posterior lateral thalamic nucleus of the rat may be subdivided into three subnuclei
based on electrophysiological responses from these regions.
We have designated these three regions the rostral (rVPL),

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

2298

J. T. FRANCIS, S. XU, AND J. K. CHAPIN

A
Dorsal
body

5

Medial

VPM
hindpaw
digits

VPL

6
forepaw digits

hindlimb (ankle, knee,
coxa and muscles)

forelimb (wrist, elbow,
shoulder and muscles)

1

3
2
Distance from Midline (mm)

4

Depth from Pial Surface (mm)

Coronal Plane

Bregma -2.3 mm

FIG. 6. Schematic drawing of somatotopy in the VPL coronal plane (A: bregma
Ϫ2.3 mm; B: bregma Ϫ2.7 mm). Insets (top
right) of A and B depict the position of the
plane related to the whole rat brain. Inset
(bottom right) of B depicts the rat right forepaw: lp, lateral pad; mp, medial pad; w,
wrist; d, digit; p, pad. The depth readings are
in reference to the highest point of the pial
surface, which is about 0.4 mm below
bregma.

7

B
Dorsal
Medial

5

body

Bregma -2.7 mm

hindlimb

VPM

d2

forelimb

d3

VPL
gh

low

d5

d4

er

d3
p2

lp

p1

p3
lp

d2

d1

6
t

mp

w

p1
w

4

p2

d4

jaw

p3

hindpaw

d1

Whisker

mp

1

3
2
Distance from midline (mm)

middle (mVPL), and caudal (cVPL). The rVPL carries mostly
proprioceptive information and has large cutaneous receptive
fields on the distal limb such as the entire forepaw or hindpaw.
The mVPL is an area where the cutaneous RFs are focal and
there is limited proprioceptive information. The cVPL appears
to be an area of large receptive fields related to cutaneous
stimulation and may preferentially convey cutaneous information that is specifically modulated by pain and visceral stimuli
(Berkley et al. 1993; Gauriau and Bernard 2004; Guilbaud
et al. 1993; Jahns 1975), although this may be speculative on
our part because we did not specifically test such stimuli. These
three subnuclei appear to run smoothly into one another and
J Neurophysiol • VOL

Depth from Pial Surface (mm)

Coronal Plane
tail

into the nuclei that border them (McAllister and Wells 1981;
Shiroyama et al. 1999).
There are several obvious trends in the rVPL. As with the
rest of the VPL the forepaw is represented at the most medial
aspect of the nucleus with the arm lateral to it followed by the
hindpaw/hindlimb and finally the body (see figures). The
representation of the forearm is expanded in the rVPL as is
the hindlimb compared with the body. This trend can be seen
throughout the VPL. We found it very difficult to find an
obvious musculotopy past the aforementioned in the rVPL.
With respect to individual muscles of the forearm we often
found opposing muscle groups to be represented in the same

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

ORGANIZATION OF THE RAT VPL THALAMUS

2299

A
Horizontal Plane
Pial Surface -6.0 mm

VPM
Diffuse RF
Proprioception
Discrete RF
d2
d3

d1

d4
d5

L
VPL

3

hindpaw

Medial

Diffuse RF
Rostral

Distance from Midline (mm)

2

g

4
-1

-2

FIG. 7. Schematic drawing of somatotopy in the
VPL horizontal plane (A, bregma Ϫ6.4 mm) and sagittal
plane (B, midline 2.8 mm). Insets (top left) of A depict
the position of the plane related to the whole rat brain:
lp, lateral pad; mp, medial pad; w, wrist. Shaded areas
in A and B depict the area where diffuse RFs were
found. The depth readings are in reference to the highest
point of the pial surface, which is about 0.4 mm below
bregma.

-4
-3
Distance from Bregma (mm)
Sagittal plane
Midline 2.8 mm

B

Diffuse RF
Proprioception

5

toe
joints

VPM
Discrete RF

an

VPL

d4

kle

6

d3
p2

Dorsal

kne

e

d2

d1

p1
mp

Rostral

-2

Diffuse RF

Depth from Pial Surface (mm)

body

-3
-4
Distance from Bregma (mm)

recording site, but this was not always the case. In general, the
overall trends seen in the mVPL for the fore- and hindpaws can
be seen in the rVPL. However, the receptive fields are much
broader with an average size on the fore- and hindpaw larger
than a digit segment and often including much of or the entire
paw. In one experiment we completely detached every muscle,
starting from the wrist, working our way up the arm to the
shoulder. With the electrode in a position Ϫ2.5 mm bregma,
2.5 lateral from the midline, and at a depth of 5.5 mm from the
cortex surface we observed activity that was both fast adapting
and nonadapting to shoulder movement. The nonadapting tonic
activity was stopped only when both the pectoralis and biceps
were removed. However, the fast adapting activity remained
J Neurophysiol • VOL

even after all the muscles had been removed; thus it was due to
joint receptors. This mixing of both joint and muscle receptors
makes it nearly impossible to be certain of the exact RF; thus
further experimentation is needed to determine whether there
is a standard musculotopy in the rat rVPL because there is
somatotopy. In addition, although we did not explicitly test
well-isolated single units for responses to both cutaneous and
proprioceptive stimulation, the multiunit responses would indicate that there is some overlap, and results from the cat
corroborate this, although further study is warranted (Andersson et al. 1966).
There is evidence that the spinal cord circuitry has already
processed the incoming proprioceptive information and trans-

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

2300

J. T. FRANCIS, S. XU, AND J. K. CHAPIN

B

A

Rt

*
VPL

*
VPM

*
*

*

Dorsal

*

*

1 mm
Rostral

1 mm

D

C

Dorsal

Medial
Rt

FIG. 8. Histological verification of mapping experiments. A and B: a sagittal section
from a left hemisphere at about 2.8 mm from
midline. C and D: a coronal section from a
left hemisphere at about 3.0 mm posterior to
bregma. B and D are magnified views of the
marked area in A and C, respectively. The
boundaries of reticular thalamic nucleus
(Rt), ventral posterolateral thalamic nucleus
(VPL), and ventral posteromedial thalamic
nucleus (VPM) are superimposed in B and
D. Note the visible electrode tracks and electrolytic lesions (marked with asterisks).

*
VPM

VPL

*
*
*
1 mm
1 mm

formed it into a higher level code (Bosco and Poppele 2000;
Bosco et al. 2000; Poppele et al. 2002) and this may lead to a
nonobvious musculotopy in the rVPL. There is also evidence
that proprioceptive information coding step- cycle–like information runs in the spinothalamic tract of rats, which terminates
partially in the VPL (Menetrey et al. 1984). Furthermore, there
is similar evidence of step cycle or endpoint information of the
forepaw seen in cuneate nucleus activity (Garifoli et al. 2002),
which projects to the VPL. In addition, there are projections
from the vestibular nuclei to the transition zone between the
VL and the VPL, which most likely corresponds at least in part
to our rVPL (Aumann et al. 1996; Shiroyama et al. 1999). With
this in mind it is not surprising that we have found proprioceptive information expressed in the VPL.
Comparison with previous work
One of the first papers dedicated to determining the electrophysiological properties of the rat VP was that of Emmers
(1965), which describes the somatotopic organization of both
J Neurophysiol • VOL

the VPM and the VPL. In a set of figures from this paper
Emmers describes the somatotopy of the VP with the rostralmost area responding to whiskers medial to the forelimb with
the body and hindlimb represented laterally in good agreement
with our results, although at the rostral-most extent of the VP
we did not find responses to whiskers. As one moved more
caudally he found an area that he called the S2 portion of VP,
where the receptive fields are less focal and more likely to be
bilateral. His S1 portion of the VP is larger and rostral to the
caudal S2 VPL. We would agree that in general the rostral half
of the thalamus has more focal receptive fields than the caudal
half, but that one can further divide the thalamus realizing that
the receptive fields are most focal between Ϫ2.5 and Ϫ3.2 mm
from bregma. We did not notice the prominence of bilateral
information being carried by the VP thalamus in the areas that
we studied extensively (Ϫ2 to Ϫ3.3 mm from bregma); admittedly this was not a goal of ours.
Tomasulo and Emmers (1970) followed up this earlier work
with a study describing the effects that lesions to the spinal

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

ORGANIZATION OF THE RAT VPL THALAMUS

cord had on defined response properties of VP cells. The
authors concluded that the input to the “S1,”, or rostral portion
of the VP received inputs from the dorsal funiculus, whereas
input to the “S2”, or caudal VP came from the ventral quadrant
as well as the dorsal portion of the lateral funiculus.
A second paper came out in 1965 describing the electrophysiological responses in the VP thalamus (Davidson 1965)
with an interpretation different from that of Emmers. Davidson
suggested that the bilateral responses seen in the caudal thalamus were in the posterior nuclear group, not the VP, and that
relatively few bilateral responses could be seen in the VP. Both
researchers were in agreement that the forelimb representation
is medial to the hindlimb and the latter are represented in a thin
strip with a smaller volume than that representing the forelimb
and the whiskers.
Angel and Clarke (1975) described results from a large
number of experiments, 304 animals yielding 505 single units
that were included in their study. The results from this work are
in general agreement with the aforementioned work. They
described a small proprioceptive representation located in the
ventral floor of the VP. We noticed a few proprioceptive units
in this region as well, but clearly most of the proprioceptive
activity courses through the rVPL.
There are some clear differences between our work and that
of Angel and Clarke, which can be explained to some extent by
the fact that they used a preparation such that the rat’s head was
on a declined angle with the nose pointing downward (the top
of the incisor bar was 23° below the horizontal plane through
the ear bars, whereas in Paxinos and Watson’s preparation, the
angle is about 5°). An important difference is that they did not
appear to map out the rostral extent of the VP, where according
to McAllister and Wells (1981), the size of the VP neurons is
smaller and therefore may have been less probable to record
from using the sharp glass electrodes with tips of 2–5 ␮m in
diameter used by the former authors. In addition, according to
Angel and Clarke the digits and the pads are at different
coronal planes (see their Fig. 5), which is in complete disagreement with our findings. We found that many VPL units were
spontaneously active in agreement with previous work (Cropper and Eisenman 1986; Davidson 1965). Angel and Clarke
suggested that most VPL cells were completely silent until
their receptive field was stimulated. This discrepancy between
their work and ours cannot be explained by the different
anesthetics used where they used urethane and we used pentobarbital in most of our studies and tested urethane as well in
five experiments, with results indistinguishable from our pentobarbital experiments. Cropper and Eisenman used urethane
for their experiments and found the VP units to be spontaneously active as well.
Anesthetics and VPL boundaries
In this study we used two different anesthetics: pentobarbital
and urethane. We did not notice any obvious differences
between the two as far as the somatotopy found in the VPL.
Obviously we could not conduct our skin-off preparation in the
unanesthetized rat, and conducting careful cutaneous mapping
on an awake rat is rather difficult; however, perhaps in the
future one could use a chronic recording implant while conducting mapping experiments using a paralyzing agent to deterJ Neurophysiol • VOL

2301

mine whether the somatotopy remains as we have described
here in the anesthetized state.
The mapping that we conducted was guided by our electrophysiological identification while being aided by the stereotaxic atlas of Paxinos and Watson (1998). As mentioned, we
did conduct a set of five experiments after we had constructed
our maps seen in Figs. 6 and 7 and made electrolytic lesions
within the different regions of the thalamus (see Fig. 8). We
cannot definitively state that at the rostral or caudal border we
were in the “VPL” and not perhaps the VL or Po. It has been
known for some time that there is a transition zone “between”
the rostral VPL and the VL (McAllister and Wells 1981), and
as referenced in Shiroyama et al. (1999). Irrespective of
whether this transition zone belongs to the VPL or the VL may
be up for debate. What is important is that we have for the first
time described a large proprioceptive representation in the rat
thalamus, which resides between approximately Ϫ2.0 to Ϫ2.5
mm from bregma. This area, and individual neurons within it,
also respond to cutaneous stimulation with large receptive
fields as we have described. Likewise, we cannot say that we
did not map out portions of the posterior oral (Po) or a transition
zone between the caudal VPL and the Po. According to
McAllister and Wells there are transition zones between the
VPL and the Po and VL and that these transition zones have
responses representative of both nuclei. Thus further histological analysis is necessary to fully describe if our proprioceptive
region is a transition zone, or in the VPL as it would appear
using the rat atlas (Paxinos and Watson 1998).
Projections to and from the rat VPL
The literature corroborates our separation of the VPL into
three zones. McAllister and Wells describe two transition
zones between the VPL and the two nuclei that border its
rostral and caudal extent, the VL and Po, respectively. According to these and other researchers (Gauriau and Bernard 2004;
Lund and Webster 1967a,b) the spinal cord projects to the
caudal and rostral portions of the VPL, but not as much to the
middle third of the nucleus, which appears to be a zone
showered by projections from the dorsal column nuclei (DCN).
The DCN also sends projections throughout the VPL
(McAllister and Wells 1981). This middle zone corresponds to
our mVPL that is characterized by focal cutaneous receptive
fields.
It has long been known that the VPL is a sensory nucleus
that carries information from the spinal cord and dorsal column
nuclei to the somatosensory cortex (Lund and Webster
1967a,b; Strick 1976). Both the DCN and the spinal cord
project to the VPL carrying information on both pain and touch
(Angel and Clarke 1975; Cropper and Eisenman 1986; Davidson 1965; Emmers 1965; Guilbaud et al. 1980) as well as
proprioception (Angel and Clarke 1975; Low et al. 1986).
There have been many studies concerned with the projections
from both the DCN (Lund and Webster 1967a,b; Mantle-St
John and Tracey 1987) and the various pathways of the spinal
cord, most notably the spinothalamic tract to the thalamus.
Lund and Webster (1967) stated that the projection from the
spinothalamic tract (STT) is in general less dense to the VP
thalamus than is the projection from the DCN, and that this
(STT) projection is concentrated on the rostral one third of the
VP with projections from the rostral few segments of the

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

2302

J. T. FRANCIS, S. XU, AND J. K. CHAPIN

cervical cord having an additional projection to the caudal VP;
later results by McAllister (McAllister and Wells 1981) appear
to agree with this. This latter projection from the rostral spinal
cord to the caudal VP could be from the lateral cervical nucleus
(Kajander and Giesler 1987). Some researchers suggested that
representations of the same body parts project from the STT
and the DCN to the same area in the VPL (Gauriau and
Bernard 2004; Ma et al. 1986). These two systems synapse on
different parts of VP neurons, with DCN projections synapsing
on the somata and STT axons on the more distal dendrites (Ma
et al. 1987; McAllister and Wells 1981).
The projections to the VPL that carry proprioceptive information appear to be segregated and send projections to the
cerebellum as well. Mantle-St. John et al. (1987) described
projections from the various brain stem nuclei to the VPL and
cerebellum. These researchers found projections from the rostral cuneate (rCuneate) and lateral (external) Cuneate nucleus
(Fukushima and Kerr 1979); both project to the cerebellum as
well as the VPL, with neurons located in the ventromedial–
caudal portion of the rCuneate projecting preferentially to the
VPL and those in the rostral portion of the rCuneate projecting
to the cerebellum. In the external Cuneate nucleus cells in the
caudal portion project to the VPL, whereas those in the rostral
portion project to the cerebellum. Nucleus X was found to
project to both the cerebellum, as it does in the cat (Kotchabhakdi and Walberg 1978), and the VP thalamus with a larger
projection to the cerebellum (Mantle-St John and Tracey
1987). Nucleus Z has been shown to project proprioceptive
information to the VP thalamus in the cat (Mantle-St John and
Tracey 1987). This nucleus has been shown to receive the same
types of input in the rat (Low et al. 1986) and may also project
to the VPL. There are also projections from the locus
coeruleus, the solitary nucleus, and the lateral cervical nucleus
(Fukushima and Kerr 1979). With the wide degree of projections into the VPL it is not surprising that it may have
functional subnuclei that deal with different modalities of
information such as pain, cutaneous sensation, and proprioceptive information.
Comparison of the rat VPL with primates
There is a good deal of evidence indicating that the VPL of
primates has three architectonically distinct subnuclei with
properties very similar to those we are proposing for the rat
VPL. The rat is capable of using its “forepaws,” which are
more like hands, to grasp and retrieve food items (Whishaw
and Tomie 1989), make reaching movements while holding
onto a robotic manipulandum and compensating for force fields
(Francis and Chapin 2004, 2006), as well as carry out texture
discrimination reaching and grasping tasks (Ballermann et al.
2001). These are all tasks often associated with primates. If the
structure of the VP nucleus is important in allowing these
abilities to have developed evolutionarily, it may not be surprising that the rat’s VP is similar to that of primates, although
perhaps the rat VPL has not developed into the three architectonically distinct subnuclei seen in primates.
We have termed our three subnuclei the rVPL, mVPL, and
the cVPL for rostral, middle, and caudal, respectively. In the
primate literature the rVPL may correspond to the VPS (superior VP), which receives proprioceptive inputs from the brain
stem and projects preferentially to areas 3a and 2 (Kaas et al.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

1984). According to Huffman and Krubitzer (2001) the VPS
corresponds with the “shell” region of the VPLc that is the
caudal VPL that was described by Friedman and Jones (1981).
In general, it seems that proprioceptive information in mammals flows rostrodorsal to the core cutaneous VPL (Kaas 2007;
Wiener et al. 1987), whereas it lies rostral to the mVPL in the
rat as seen in Figs. 2 and 7; it is in general also at a more dorsal
level than is the mVPL.
The core cutaneous VPL (corresponding to our mVPL)
receives cutaneous information from SA and RA receptors via
the dorsal column nuclei and projects preferentially to areas 3b
and 1 in monkeys (Kaas et al. 1984; Nelson and Kaas 1981)
and, in general, to the primary somatosensory cortex in mammals. The general somatotopy in the mammalian VP is with the
face most medial (VPM) followed by the forelimb and hindlimb as one moves laterally. It should be noted that the
somatotopy in the rat VPL differs from primates in the fact that
the fore- and hindpaw representations are inverted such that the
tips of the digits are dorsal and the palmar pads are ventral,
information that has been alluded to previously (Alloway et al.
2003; Angel and Clarke 1975). This inverted pattern is also
seen in the flying fox (Manger et al. 2001).
The ventral posterior inferior nucleus (VPI) of primates
receives information from the spinothalamic system and projects
preferentially to the second somatosensory area (Friedman and
Murray 1986; Stevens et al. 1993) and to a lesser extent S1 (Shi
et al. 1993; Stevens et al. 1993). It has been reported that the
vestibular nuclei project to VPI in the monkey (Deecke et al.
1974, 1977) and that the caudal VP complex in the cat projects
to the parietal vestibular cortex (Blum et al. 1979). In the rat
the caudal VP receives projections from the vestibular nuclei as
well (Shiroyama et al. 1999). In addition, both the macaque
VPI (Craig 2006) and the rat cVPL (Gauriau and Bernard
2004) receive projections from lamina 1 of the spinal cord,
lending credence to our comparison of the rat cVPL with the
VPI. Lamina 1 neurons of the macaque send a denser projection to the posterior ventromedial nucleus (VMpo) than to the
VPI (Craig and Zhang 2006). In the rat, lamina 1 projections
are strongest to a restricted portion of the cVPL; thus the cVPL
in the rat may further differentiate into the VPI and the VMpo
in the macaque.
In conclusion, we have presented evidence for a proprioceptive thalamic nucleus in the rat that lies in the rostral VPL
(rVPL). We propose that this nucleus serves the purpose of
the primate VPS in the rat and may be its evolutionary
predecessor. The core cutaneous nucleus of the rat lies in the
middle of the VPL (mVPL) and is the rat equivalent of
the primate VPL, where the somatosensory receptive fields
are focal. Caudal to the mVPL is a region where the
receptive fields are broad and this region receives dense
restricted projections from lamina 1 and may be the evolutionary predecessor of the VPI and the VMpo. Thus it is
possible that during evolution this rostrocaudal orientation
of the rat VPL was rotated such that the rVPL moved dorsal
and the cVPL inferior, or ventral. In agreement with this
rotation hypothesis, the VPL representation of the fore- and
hindpaw of the rat is rotated with respect to the monkey
VPL. Further histological analysis is necessary to determine
whether these putative nuclei (rVPL, mVPL, and cVPL) are
in fact separable and distinct.

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

ORGANIZATION OF THE RAT VPL THALAMUS
GRANTS

This work was supported by National Academies Keck Futures Initiative
Grant SP09 to J. T. Francis and Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Grants ONR N001498-00-C-8006 and N660010-3-C-8041 to J. K. Chapin.
REFERENCES

Alloway KD, Hoffer ZS, Hoover JE. Quantitative comparisons of corticothalamic topography within the ventrobasal complex and the posterior
nucleus of the rodent thalamus. Brain Res 968: 54 – 68, 2003.
Andersson SA, Landgren S, Wolsk D. The thalamic relay and cortical
projection of group I muscle afferents from the forelimb of the cat. J Physiol
183: 576 –591, 1966.
Angel A, Clarke KA. An analysis of the representation of the forelimb in the
ventrobasal thalamic complex of the albino rat. J Physiol 249: 399 – 423,
1975.
Aumann TD, Rawson JA, Pichitpornchai C, Horne MK. Projections from
the cerebellar interposed and dorsal column nuclei to the thalamus in the rat:
a double anterograde labelling study. J Comp Neurol 368: 608 – 619, 1996.
Ballermann M, McKenna J, Whishaw IQ. A grasp-related deficit in tactile
discrimination following dorsal column lesion in the rat. Brain Res Bull 54:
237–242, 2001.
Berkley KJ, Guilbaud G, Benoist JM, Gautron M. Responses of neurons in
and near the thalamic ventrobasal complex of the rat to stimulation of uterus,
cervix, vagina, colon, and skin. J Neurophysiol 69: 557–568, 1993.
Blum PS, Day MJ, Carpenter MB, Gilman S. Thalamic components of the
ascending vestibular system. Exp Neurol 64: 587– 603, 1979.
Bosco G, Poppele RE. Reference frames for spinal proprioception: kinematics
based or kinetics based? J Neurophysiol 83: 2946 –2955, 2000.
Bosco G, Poppele RE, Eian J. Reference frames for spinal proprioception:
limb endpoint based or joint-level based? J Neurophysiol 83: 2931–2945,
2000.
Craig AD. Retrograde analyses of spinothalamic projections in the macaque
monkey: input to ventral posterior nuclei. J Comp Neurol 499: 965–978,
2006.
Craig AD, Zhang ET. Retrograde analyses of spinothalamic projections in the
macaque monkey: input to posterolateral thalamus. J Comp Neurol 499:
953–964, 2006.
Cropper EC, Eisenman JS. Localization of responses in the somatosensory
thalamus of the rat. Brain Res Bull 16: 83–91, 1986.
Davidson N. The projection of afferent pathways on the thalamus of the rat.
J Comp Neurol 124: 377–390, 1965.
Deecke L, Schwarz DW, Fredrickson JM. Nucleus ventroposterior inferior
(VPI) as the ventibular thalamic relay in the rhesus monkey. I. Field
potential investigation. Exp Brain Res 20: 88 –100, 1974.
Deecke L, Schwarz DW, Fredrickson JM. Vestibular responses in the rhesus
monkey ventroposterior thalamus. II. Vestibulo-proprioceptive convergence
at thalamic neurons. Exp Brain Res 30: 219 –232, 1977.
Doetsch GS, Standage GP, Johnston KW, Lin CS. Thalamic connections of
two functional subdivisions of the somatosensory forepaw cerebral cortex of
the raccoon. J Neurosci 8: 1873–1886, 1988.
Emmers R. Organization of the first and the second somesthetic regions (Si
and Sii) in the rat thalamus. J Comp Neurol 124: 215–227, 1965.
Fabri M, Burton H. Topography of connections between primary somatosensory cortex and posterior complex in rat: a multiple fluorescent tracer
study. Brain Res 538: 351–357, 1991.
Francis JT, Chapin JK. Force field apparatus for investigating movement
control in small animals. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 51: 963–965, 2004.
Francis JT, Chapin JK. Neural ensemble activity from multiple brain regions
predicts kinematic and dynamic variables in a multiple force field reaching
task. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 14: 172–174, 2006.
Friedman DP, Jones EG. Thalamic input to areas 3a and 2 in monkeys.
J Neurophysiol 45: 59 – 85, 1981.
Friedman DP, Murray EA. Thalamic connectivity of the second somatosensory area and neighboring somatosensory fields of the lateral sulcus of the
macaque. J Comp Neurol 252: 348 –373, 1986.
Fukushima T, Kerr FW. Organization of trigeminothalamic tracts and other
thalamic afferent systems of the brainstem in the rat: presence of gelatinosa
neurons with thalamic connections. J Comp Neurol 183: 169 –184, 1979.
Garifoli A, Caserta C, Bosco G, Lombardo SA, Casabona A, Perciavalle V.
Kinematic features of passive forelimb movements and rat cuneate neuron
discharges. Neuroreport 13: 267–271, 2002.
J Neurophysiol • VOL

2303

Gauriau C, Bernard JF. A comparative reappraisal of projections from the
superficial laminae of the dorsal horn in the rat: the forebrain. J Comp
Neurol 468: 24 –56, 2004.
Ghez C, Sainburg R. Proprioceptive control of interjoint coordination. Can
J Physiol Pharmacol 73: 273–284, 1995.
Gioanni Y. Cortical mapping and laminar analysis of the cutaneous and
proprioceptive inputs from the rat foreleg: an extra- and intra-cellular study.
Exp Brain Res 67: 510 –522, 1987.
Gordon J, Ghilardi MF, Ghez C. Impairments of reaching movements in
patients without proprioception. I. Spatial errors. J Neurophysiol 73: 347–
360, 1995.
Graziano MS. Where is my arm? The relative role of vision and proprioception in the neuronal representation of limb position. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
96: 10418 –10421, 1999.
Guilbaud G, Berkley KJ, Benoist JM, Gautron M. Responses of neurons in
thalamic ventrobasal complex of rats to graded distension of uterus and
vagina and to uterine suprafusion with bradykinin and prostaglandin F2
alpha. Brain Res 614: 285–290, 1993.
Guilbaud G, Peschanski M, Gautron M, Binder D. Neurones responding to
noxious stimulation in VB complex and caudal adjacent regions in the
thalamus of the rat. Pain 8: 303–318, 1980.
Huffman KJ, Krubitzer L. Thalamo-cortical connections of areas 3a and M1
in marmoset monkeys. J Comp Neurol 435: 291–310, 2001.
Jahns R. Types of neuronal responses in the rat thalamus to peripheral
temperature changes. Exp Brain Res 23: 157–166, 1975.
Kaas JH. The evolution of the dorsal thalamus in mammals. In: Evolution of
Nervous Systems, edited by Kaas JH. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2007.
Kaas JH, Nelson RJ, Sur M, Dykes RW, Merzenich MM. The somatotopic
organization of the ventroposterior thalamus of the squirrel monkey, Saimiri
sciureus. J Comp Neurol 226: 111–140, 1984.
Kajander KC, Giesler GJ Jr. Responses of neurons in the lateral cervical
nucleus of the cat to noxious cutaneous stimulation. J Neurophysiol 57:
1686 –1704, 1987.
Kotchabhakdi N, Walberg F. Cerebellar afferent projections from the vestibular
nuclei in the cat: an experimental study with the method of retrograde axonal
transport of horseradish peroxidase. Exp Brain Res 31: 591– 604, 1978.
Low JS, Mantle-St John LA, Tracey DJ. Nucleus Z in the rat: spinal
afferents from collaterals of dorsal spinocerebellar tract neurons. J Comp
Neurol 243: 510 –526, 1986.
Lund RD, Webster KE. Thalamic afferents from the dorsal column nuclei.
An experimental anatomical study in the rat. J Comp Neurol 130: 301–312,
1967a.
Lund RD, Webster KE. Thalamic afferents from the spinal cord and trigeminal nuclei. An experimental anatomical study in the rat. J Comp Neurol
130: 313–328, 1967b.
Ma W, Peschanski M, Besson JM. The overlap of spinothalamic and dorsal
column nuclei projections in the ventrobasal complex of the rat thalamus: a
double anterograde labeling study using light microscopy analysis. J Comp
Neurol 245: 531–540, 1986.
Ma W, Peschanski M, Ralston HJ 3rd. The differential synaptic organization
of the spinal and lemniscal projections to the ventrobasal complex of the rat
thalamus. Evidence for convergence of the two systems upon single thalamic neurons. Neuroscience 22: 925–934, 1987.
Manger PR, Rosa MG, Collins R. Somatotopic organization and cortical
projections of the ventrobasal complex of the flying fox: an “inverted” wing
representation in the thalamus. Somatosens Mot Res 18: 19 –30, 2001.
Mantle-St John LA, Tracey DJ. Somatosensory nuclei in the brainstem of the
rat: independent projections to the thalamus and cerebellum. J Comp Neurol
255: 259 –271, 1987.
McAllister JP, Wells J. The structural organization of the ventral posterolateral nucleus in the rat. J Comp Neurol 197: 271–301, 1981.
Menetrey D, de Pommery J, Roudier F. Properties of deep spinothalamic
tract cells in the rat, with special reference to ventromedial zone of lumbar
dorsal horn. J Neurophysiol 52: 612– 624, 1984.
Nelson RJ, Kaas JH. Connections of the ventroposterior nucleus of the thalamus
with the body surface representations in cortical areas 3b and 1 of the cynomolgus macaque (Macaca fascicularis). J Comp Neurol 199: 29 – 64, 1981.
Paxinos G, Watson C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. San Diego,
CA: Academic Press, 1998.
Poppele RE, Bosco G, Rankin AM. Independent representations of limb axis
length and orientation in spinocerebellar response components. J Neurophysiol 87: 409 – 422, 2002.
Price JL. Thalamus. The Rat Nervous System (2nd ed.), edited by Paxinos G.
San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1995, p. 629 – 648.

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

2304

J. T. FRANCIS, S. XU, AND J. K. CHAPIN

Saunders JA, Knill DC. Humans use continuous visual feedback from the
hand to control fast reaching movements. Exp Brain Res 152: 341–352,
2003.
Shi T, Stevens RT, Tessier J, Apkarian AV. Spinothalamocortical inputs
nonpreferentially innervate the superficial and deep cortical layers of SI.
Neurosci Lett 160: 209 –213, 1993.
Shiroyama T, Kayahara T, Yasui Y, Nomura J, Nakano K. Projections of
the vestibular nuclei to the thalamus in the rat: a Phaseolus vulgaris
leucoagglutinin study. J Comp Neurol 407: 318 –332, 1999.
Stevens RT, London SM, Apkarian AV. Spinothalamocortical projections to
the secondary somatosensory cortex (SII) in squirrel monkey. Brain Res
631: 241–246, 1993.

J Neurophysiol • VOL

Strick PL. Anatomical analysis of ventrolateral thalamic input to primate
motor cortex. J Neurophysiol 39: 1020 –1031, 1976.
Tomasulo KC, Emmers R. Spinal afferents to SI and SII of the rat thalamus.
Exp Neurol 26: 482– 497, 1970.
Tracey DJ, Waite PME. Somatosensory system. In: The Rat Nervous System
(2nd ed.), edited by Paxinos G. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1995,
p. 689 –704.
Whishaw IQ, Tomie JA. Olfaction directs skilled forelimb reaching in the rat.
Behav Brain Res 32: 11–21, 1989.
Wiener SI, Johnson JI, Ostapoff EM. Organization of postcranial kinesthetic
projections to the ventrobasal thalamus in raccoons. J Comp Neurol 258:
496 –508, 1987.

99 • MAY 2008 •

www.jn.org

