© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

Self-sustained rhythmic activity in the
thalamic reticular nucleus mediated by
depolarizing GABAA receptor potentials

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

M. Bazhenov1, I. Timofeev2, M. Steriade2 and T.J. Sejnowski1,3
1

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk Institute, Computational Neurobiology Laboratory, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road,
La Jolla, California 92037, USA

2

Laboratory of Neurophysiology, School of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec G1K 7P4, Canada

3

Department of Biology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA
Correspondence should be addressed to M.B. (bazhenov@salk.edu)

Intracellular recordings from reticular thalamic (RE) neurons in vivo revealed inhibitory postsynaptic
potentials (IPSPs) between RE cells that reversed and became depolarizing at the hyperpolarized
membrane potentials that occur during sleep. These excitatory IPSPs can directly trigger low-threshold spikes (LTSs). The oscillatory mechanisms underlying IPSP-triggered LTSs crowned by spike
bursts were investigated in models of isolated RE networks. In a one-dimensional network model,
external stimulation evoked waves of excitation propagating at a constant velocity of 25–150 cells
per second. In a large-scale, two-dimensional model of the reticular nucleus, the network showed
transient or self-sustained oscillations controlled by the maximum conductance of the low-threshold
calcium current and the membrane potential. This model predicts that the isolated reticular nucleus
could initiate sequences of spindle oscillations in thalamocortical networks in vivo.

Sleep spindle oscillations consist of waxing-and-waning field potentials of 7 to 14 Hz, which last 1 to 3 seconds and recur every 5 to 15
seconds. These oscillations are generated in the thalamus by interaction between thalamic reticular (RE) and thalamocortical (TC)
cells1–4. The waxing phase of spindle oscillations is associated with
recruitment of neurons from dorsal thalamic and RE nuclei5, whereas the waning phase results from calcium-induced cAMP upregulation of hyperpolarization-activated cation current, Ih, in TC cells6–8.
Extracellular neuron and field-potential recordings from the isolated RE nucleus in vivo show that the deafferented RE nucleus can
itself generate 7–14 Hz oscillations9, and so the reticular nucleus
may be involved in initiating sequences of spindle oscillations in the
intact RE–TC network.
The GABAergic neurons of the RE nucleus are usually thought
to interact by reciprocal inhibition. Computational models of
inhibitory RE networks produce different types of population
activity, including full and partial spatial clustering10 and temporal synchronization alternating between periods of coherent oscillatory activity and periods of almost chaotic behavior11. The
oscillations in these models occur because the synaptic inhibition
causes burst discharges when the reversal potential for inhibitory synapses is sufficiently negative to remove inactivation of the
low-threshold calcium current.
For the reciprocal GABAA receptor synapses between RE cells,
the chloride reversal potential is about –71 mV, which is depolarized compared to the reversal potential in TC cells12. Thus, at a resting membrane potential of about –78 mV (ref. 13), the
GABAA-receptor-mediated IPSPs in an RE cell reverse and could
trigger a burst of sodium spikes14. Here we used in-vivo recordings
and computational models of RE cells to investigate cellular dynamics at different membrane potentials. We found, in vivo, that when RE
168

cells were hyperpolarized below the chloride reversal potential,
GABAA-receptor-mediated synaptic excitation led to a low-threshold calcium action potential crowned by sodium spikes. In a computer model of a hyperpolarized RE network, this mechanism
produced propagating patterns of spike-burst activity, which could
be transformed into self-sustained oscillations.

RESULTS
Low-threshold spike bursts in RE neurons in vivo
Intracellular recordings from RE cells (n = 97) in cats were characterized by prolonged spike bursts with accelerando-decelerando patterns, during either spontaneous oscillatory activity or activity
evoked by dorsal thalamic stimulation (Figs. 1–3). Such prolonged
spike bursts, consisting of progressively decreasing followed by
increasing interspike intervals, are in contrast to the short spike
bursts of thalamocortical neurons15. Some RE neurons were also
morphologically identified by intracellular staining with Neurobiotin
(data not shown). The resting membrane potential (Vm) of RE neurons was –62.5 ± 2.9 mV (mean ± standard error), which is relatively depolarized compared to results reported with patch pipettes13.
After Vm was determined, most of the intracellular recordings were
done with slight (0.2–0.5 nA) DC hyperpolarization.
During the state of resting sleep with long-range synchronization of electrical activity, neocortical and thalamic neurons display
three major rhythms: slow oscillations (<1 Hz), delta waves (1–4
Hz) and spindles (7–15 Hz). In animals under ketamine-xylazine
anesthesia, RE neurons are hyperpolarized during the depth-positive
cortical electroencephalogram (EEG) component of the slow oscillation and depolarized during the depth-negative EEG waves16. This
cortically generated spontaneous slow oscillation was used to test
the responsiveness of RE neurons at different membrane voltages
nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 2 • february 1999

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

because it affects both somatic and dendritic compartments
of RE neurons, unlike the current pulses that are usually
applied with somatic impalement. This is particularly
important for RE neurons because their dendritic voltage is
poorly controlled from the soma17, so current pulses probably do not affect remote parts of the dendritic tree.
Electrical stimulation applied to the dorsal thalamus elicits an EPSP crowned by a spike burst in RE neurons, followed by an IPSP and a period of disfacilitation: a
long-lasting absence of synaptic activity18. Here we stimulated the thalamic VL nucleus and confirmed these findings.
In 10 out of 32 neurons tested, diminishing the stimulus
intensity resulted in long-latency (32.2 ± 3.5 ms) hyperpolarizing IPSPs when stimuli were applied at a relatively depolarized Vm (Fig. 1). Because RE neurons are GABAergic and
reciprocally connected19, this primary IPSP probably originated from neighboring RE neurons that were excited by
axons of thalamocortical and/or corticothalamic cells. However, during the hyperpolarizing phase of the slow oscillation, VL stimuli with the same parameters resulted in reversed IPSPs
crowned by high-frequency spike bursts (Fig. 1).
Stimuli were delivered to VL every five seconds. Some of them
occurred at relatively depolarized Vm levels, whereas others were
delivered during the hyperpolarizing phase of the slow oscillation,
associated with different degrees of disfacilitation. Stimuli applied
during a relatively depolarized Vm elicited an inhibitory IPSP followed by a rebound spike burst (Fig. 1). As stimuli were delivered
at Vm levels closer to the reversal potential for chloride ions, hyperpolarizing responses disappeared and were replaced by depolarizing responses. At more hyperpolarized Vm levels, these reversed
IPSPs triggered a full-blown, high-frequency spike burst.
We studied the activity patterns of RE neurons in ipsilaterally
decorticated cats. Decortication removes the inputs generated by
the cortical slow oscillation, leaving intact the thalamically generated spindle and delta oscillations20. RE neurons showed two main
forms of spontaneous oscillatory activity. The first pattern was a
spindle oscillation characterized by rhythmically recurring (7–12
Hz) high-frequency spike bursts on a depolarizing envelope19. The
second pattern was the occurrence of periodic spike bursts, mainly
at frequencies around 2–3 Hz (Fig. 2). In multi-site, multi-unit
recordings, these bursts did not occur simultaneously, but followed
each other, even when spindle oscillations occurred almost simultaneously. For example, in a typical recording (Fig. 2), a perispike
histogram triggered by the first action potential in the burst of one
cell shows that most spikes in a pool of neurons recorded through
another electrode occurred either before or after these bursts.
nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 2 • february 1999

Amplitude of IPSPs (mV)

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

Fig. 1. Reversed IPSP in an RE neuron in vivo directly triggers a
low-threshold spike (LTS). Intact thalamocortical connections.
Left column, responses of an RE neuron to four stimuli applied to
the thalamic VL nucleus (arrowhead). At relatively depolarized Vm
(–61 mV), low-intensity thalamic stimuli evoked an IPSP-rebound
sequence. When the stimulus (same parameters as above)
occurred during the hyperpolarizing phase of the slow oscillation,
the IPSP reversed and (at –78 mV) directly triggered an LTS
crowned by spike burst. The latency of LTS was in the range of
40–50 ms. The early part of two responses (at –61 mV and at –78
mV) are enlarged at right. Bottom right, the amplitude of the
postsynaptic response, measured 75 ms after the stimulus, is plotted against Vm. The IPSP depended linearly on Vm from depolarized levels to the reversal potential (–68 mV); thereafter, the
depolarizing IPSP directly activated the LTS, which added a depolarizing deflection to the linear function (solid and dotted lines).

Similar burst patterns were observed in intracellularly recorded
RE neurons. At rest or under slight DC hyperpolarizing currents,
RE neurons showed periodic (0.3–0.6 Hz) burst activity (Fig. 3a).
Usually, this bursting activity was abolished by release of the neuron from DC hyperpolarizing current or by slight DC depolarization. Under these conditions, RE neurons showed hyperpolarizing
potentials resembling IPSPs. The frequency of the hyperpolarizing
potentials was almost identical to the frequency of bursts recorded
under DC hyperpolarizing current (Fig. 3). This observation, and
the finding that the IPSPs of RE neurons can only slightly shunt the
low-threshold spikes (LTSs)21, suggest that, at the relatively hyperpolarized Vm levels that occur during resting sleep with EEG synchronization, the reversed IPSPs cause burst firing in RE neurons,
which may maintain persistent activity within the RE nucleus and
initiate spindle activity.
Computer models of activity patterns in the RE network
The ability of a reversed IPSP to trigger a low-threshold calcium
spike in RE cells was investigated in computer models of an isolated RE neuron. We first simulated an RE cell with a GABAA receptor IPSP at different levels of membrane potential (Fig. 4). At the
relatively depolarized membrane potential of –65 mV, the lowthreshold calcium current in the RE cell was inactivated. Hyperpolarization evoked by the GABA A IPSP led to the partial
deinactivation of the low-threshold calcium current and a weak
rebound LTS crowned by a single sodium spike. At a more negative level of membrane potential, the low-threshold calcium cur169

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

n = 10

Fig. 2. Spontaneous activity of RE neurons in vivo is characterized by spindle activity interspersed with low-frequency (∼ 2 Hz) spike bursts. Ketamine-xylazine
anesthesia. Cortical activity was depressed by application
of potassium acetate. Two traces show simultaneous
recording of multi-neuron activity from RE nucleus (electrodes separated by 1 mm). Spindles occurred virtually
simultaneously. Expanded fragments show spindles (top
left arrowhead) and lower-frequency spike bursts of RE
neurons during interspindle lull (bottom right arrowhead). The histogram (10-ms bins) triggered by the first
spike in a burst in the top recording depicts the temporal
relationship between the two multi-neuron traces (filled
bars for upper trace and open bars for lower trace). The
burst firing in one neuron preferentially occurs between
the bursts of the other neuron (peaks of filled histogram
cut off between 0 and 100 ms).

ms

rent in the RE cell was partially deinactivated at rest; however, near
the chloride reversal potential, the IPSP was diminished, and, at
–76 mV, the chloride IPSP in the RE neuron was reversed. Activation of the GABAA receptor synaptic current at the hyperpolarized
level led to depolarization, followed by an LTS and a burst of sodium spikes in the RE cell. During burst discharge in the RE cell,
depolarization inactivated the low-threshold calcium current, so
the cell failed to produce a second burst of spikes after a 200-ms
delay. However, a third stimulus delivered after a 400-ms delay was
again followed by a burst of sodium spikes. The IPSP-evoked depolarization was relatively weak, and strong deinactivation of lowthreshold calcium current was required to produce an LTS followed
by a burst of sodium spikes. Furthermore, immediately after the
burst of spikes, the cell was hyperpolarized as much as 2–3 mV, and
additional depolarization was required to elicit an LTS. This hyperpolarization resulted from inactivation of the low-threshold calcium current, which was slightly activated at membrane potentials
around –76 mV and depolarized the cell about 2 mV before the
burst. Consequently, a relatively long time delay (about 350 ms)
between shocks was required to obtain a burst of spikes after the

second stimulus. This is different from an EPSP-evoked LTS, which
can sustain burst discharges at a frequency of 10 Hz during spindle oscillations5 or augmenting responses22.
Dynamical properties of the isolated RE network hyperpolarized below the chloride reversal potential were investigated in a
one-dimensional network model with 100 RE cells (see Methods).
An external AMPA receptor stimulus applied to the RE cell located at the boundary of the network triggered a localized pattern of
spike-burst activity that propagated with constant velocity through
the RE network (Fig. 5a). The mechanism of propagation depended on the level of the membrane potential in RE cells. At membrane potentials of about –75 mV, the low-threshold calcium
current in RE cells was deinactivated. Bursts of spikes in presynaptic RE cells led to reversed GABAA receptor IPSPs, followed by
a low-threshold calcium spike and a burst of sodium spikes in
neighboring RE cells (Fig. 5b). The temporal inactivation of the
low-threshold calcium current in an RE cell after a burst discharge
prevented oscillations from developing in the cell. All RE cells were
grouped into clusters that fired simultaneously, whose size depended on the radius of synaptic interconnections (N). Only some of

a

b

Fig. 3. Spontaneous activity of RE neurons. Different cells (a and b) are from two decorticated cats. At the resting membrane potential (–60 mV), the
RE neurons showed periodic hyperpolarizing potentials (marked by asterisks). Under slight DC hyperpolarization (–76 mV in a and –68 mV in b), the
hyperpolarizing potentials were not longer visible, but high-frequency spike bursts occurred with approximately the same period icity. Fragments
expanded at right are marked by large asterisks.
170

nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 2 • february 1999

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

network. Only transient waves were observed in networks
smaller than about 25 × 25 cells.
A similar transformation of transient oscillations into selfsustained oscillations in a two-dimensional RE network could
be produced by depolarizing the RE cells. In typical time
traces of RE cells from a network with 33 × 33 RE cells at different levels of membrane potential produced by DC current
injection (Fig. 8), only transient oscillations in the form of
cylindrical waves, similar to those in Fig. 7a, were observed
at the resting membrane potential. A weak depolarization
transformed them into an almost periodic self-sustained
oscillation (spiral wave) with a frequency around 2.5 Hz (Fig.
8a). Further depolarization increased the population frequency up to about 10 Hz (Fig. 8b) and reduced the amplitude of the average activity (compare the amplitude scales in
Fig. 8a and b). The decrease reflected a reduction from four spikes
per burst discharge in the RE cells at more hyperpolarized levels of
membrane potential into weaker and mostly single-spike discharges
when the RE cells were only slightly hyperpolarized below the chloride reversal potential. Population oscillations with a frequency
around 10 Hz were produced by RE cells oscillating at around 5 Hz,
which occurred by delayed activation of the low-threshold calcium
spikes in RE cells placed just below the chloride reversal potential.
These neurons showed long (1–3 s) epochs of subthreshold oscillations interrupted by the sequences of spiking-bursting activity.

the RE cells from each cluster displayed sodium spikes, whereas
others showed reversed IPSPs and partial calcium spikes but no
sodium spikes (see cells 6 and 8 in Fig. 5).
IPSP-based waves of excitation propagated through the network
with a constant velocity of 25–150 cells per second (Fig. 6). The size
of the clusters of RE cells that were synchronously activated on each
cycle of oscillation increased with N, which increased the propagation speed. Increasing the GABAA receptor conductances (gGABAA)
between the RE cells reduced the time delay between IPSP onset and
the appearance of sodium spikes, which also raised the speed when
gGABAA was less than 0.2 µS. For gGABAA > 0.2 µS, the speed of propagation decreased for N < 7 or displayed slow oscillations around
DISCUSSION
an average value, which depended on the radius of interconnections,
Our intracellular recordings from RE neurons at resting and hyperfor N > 7. Stronger GABAA receptor inhibition between RE cells
polarized membrane potentials in vivo showed that reversed IPSPs
between RE cells can directly trigger an LTS. Models of thalamic netreduced the length of the burst discharges23, which limited an
works examined here demonstrate that this reversal may have imporincrease in the speed. Propagating patterns did not occur for gGABAA
lim
lim
< 0.04 µS or for gGABAA > gGABA
A, where the limiting gGABAA
increased with increasing N (see Fig. 6). Wave activity was
also absent for all networks with N < 2.
In a one-dimensional network with flow boundary a
conditions (see Methods), the localized patterns terminated at the boundaries. To check the effect of network
geometry, we simulated a two-dimensional network of
RE cells hyperpolarized below the chloride reversal potential. The spatiotemporal patterns in a two-dimensional
network depended on the maximal conductance for the
low-threshold calcium current in RE cells. For gCa below
Time (ms)
lim
some critical value (gCa
≅ 2.3 mS/cm2 for a network of 50
× 50 cells with N = 4), a single stimulus applied at the
boundary led to a cylindrical wave of spike-burst activity b
that traveled through the network and disappeared at the
boundary (Fig. 7a). The wavefront consisted of almost
synchronously firing RE cells. Increase of the maximal
lim
conductance for IT above gCa
led to self-sustained oscillations; the wave of excitation evoked by the initial stimulus transformed into a rotating spiral wave (Fig. 7b). The
location of the spiral center was random and depended
on the initial stimulation as well as the variability in the
parameters of the cells in the network. The individual cells
from the network showed bursts of sodium spikes every
250–300 ms corresponding to the fronts of the spiral wave.
Further increase of the maximal conductance for the lowFig. 5. Localized pattern of activity propagating through the model of an isolated RE netthreshold calcium current transformed the single spiral
work. (a) RE cell #1 was stimulated at t = 0, which triggered a localized pattern that
wave into nonregular burst discharges of the RE cells. The traveled with constant velocity through the RE network. (b) Six neighbor RE cells from
critical values of the maximal conductance for IT at tran- the network. A burst of spikes in one RE cell led to a depolarizing GABA IPSP followed
A
sitions between the transient mode (single cylindrical by an LTS and a burst of sodium spikes in the neighboring RE cells. Temporal inactivation
wave), the periodic oscillations (spiral wave) and the non- of the low-threshold calcium current in RE cell after the burst discharge prevented the
regular oscillations decreased with increasing size of the oscillations from developing. Triangles mark t = 0, the time of stimulation.
RE cell number

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

Fig. 4. Response of a model RE cell stimulated by a 5-Hz train of GABAA receptor
IPSPs at different levels of membrane
potential. At a resting membrane potential
of –65 mV, the low-threshold calcium current was inactivated, and the GABAA
receptor IPSP was followed by a weak
rebound LTS with a single spike. For Vm =
–76 mV, the IPSP was reversed and evoked
a burst of sodium spikes. Inactivation of
the low-threshold calcium current during
the first burst discharge reduced the
response to the second shock.

nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 2 • february 1999

171

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

a

RE cell #

Velocity (cells/ms)

Time (ms)

GABAA (µS)

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

RE cell #

b

Time (ms)

Fig. 6. Velocity of the traveling wave as a function of GABAA receptor coupling
strength and radius of RE–RE connections in a one-dimensional RE network
model. (a) Velocity of propagation as a function of GABAA conductance. N is the
radii of connections. For N > 6 and gGABAA > 0.2 µS, the speed of propagation
showed only a weak dependence on GABAA receptor coupling and radius of
RE–RE connections. The solid curves are the nonlinear fits of the calculated data
(indicated by different symbols). (b) Localized activity patterns propagating with
different speed: gGABAA = 0.1 µS, N = 2 (left) and gGABAA = 0.4 µS, N = 7 (right).

by spiral waves of electrical excitation in heart cells32. However, local
tant consequences for the collective dynamics of large populations of
RE cells. A single stimulus applied to an isolated one-dimensional
electrical coupling is required to maintain spiral waves in this sysRE network hyperpolarized below the chloride reversal potential
tem, which leads to the same mechanism of propagation as in the
triggered an isolated wave of spike-burst activity that traveled
reaction-diffusion systems. In our RE network model, the mechathrough the RE network and either terminated at the boundaries or
nisms promoting pattern formation did not depend on having local
circulated indefinitely when periodic boundary conditions were
interconnections between cells. The burst activity in the presynaptic
used. The mechanism of propagation was based on GABAA-recepRE neurons initiated burst discharges in the target cells through the
GABAA-receptor-mediated depolarization when the neurons were
tor-mediated depolarization, followed by a calcium spike in the postsynaptic RE cells. Similar localized patterns have been described in
below the chloride reversal potential. At the same time, these synapsnetwork models of cortical excitatory cells24,25 and simplified
es had an inhibitory influence among synchronously firing RE neurons. Such dual excitatory/inhibitory synaptic interconnections may
inhibitory cells26; however, in the latter study, wave propagation was
caused by asymmetric inhibition between neurons and
rebound bursts, but not by direct triggering of the LTS
a
by IPSPs. Activity patterns traveling through networks
of excitatory and inhibitory cells have been investigated in computational models of hippocampal slices27,28.
In these models, the propagation from one cell to
another was mediated mostly by AMPA receptors
between pyramidal neurons, which also synchronized
the burst discharges elicited by NMDA-receptor-mediated synaptic currents.
A one-dimensional network of RE cells serves as a
model for an RE slice preparation cut transversely to
the thin, two-dimensional sheet of RE neurons19. We
also tested a two-dimensional RE network model
hyperpolarized below the chloride reversal potential.
In this model, the transient wave patterns were trans- b
formed into persistent oscillations in the form of the
spiral waves if the maximal conductance for the IT current in RE cells exceeded a critical value, which depended on the size of the network and the level of membrane
potential in the RE cells. The spiral pattern that
appeared when gCa for IT reached a bifurcation is similar to those in general reaction-diffusion systems,
which may display spiral patterns near the point of
bifurcation from spatially homogeneous solutions29. If
the size of the system is large enough, coexisting spirals
occur in the large-scale, two-dimensional, reaction-diffusion model, and an increase of the control parameter
in this system leads to defect-media turbulence in the
form of spontaneously appearing and annihilating spi- Fig. 7. Localized patterns of activity in a two-dimensional network model of 50 × 50 RE
cells (x- and y-axes) with flow boundary conditions. (a) The maximal conductance for
ral waves30,31. This suggests that in large-scale, two- low-threshold calcium current in RE cells was g = 2.2 mS/cm2. Initial stimulation of the
T
dimensional networks of RE cells, regimes similar to RE cell #(1,1; left upper corner) at t = 0 led a cylindrical
wave traveling through the RE
defect-media turbulence may be observed. One of the network with a constant velocity. (b) gT = 2.45 mS/cm2. Increasing the maximal conducfirst known examples of spiral-wave activity in a bio- tance for low-threshold calcium current led to self-sustained patterns of activity in the
logical system is cardiac arrythmias, which are initiated form of a rotating one-arm spiral wave.
172

nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 2 • february 1999

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

Amplitude (mV)

a
50 mV

5 mV

Frequency (Hz)

b
50 mV

Amplitude (mV)

Fig. 8. The influence of the membrane potential on the frequency of oscillations in a twodimensional network model with 33 × 33 RE
cells. Left, the membrane potentials of two RE
cells and the average activity of 112 RE cells
from the center of the network. Right, the
Fourier spectrum of the average activity. (a) A
relatively hyperpolarized RE network showed
oscillations at around 2.5 Hz. (b) After depolarization (just below the chloride reversal
potential), the frequency of the population
oscillations shifted to around 9 Hz. In the
Fourier spectrum, the smaller peak at about
4.5 Hz corresponded to the oscillation frequencies of the individual RE cells.

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

1 mV

explain the formation of localized activity patterns without highly
synchronous oscillatory states in a network with nonlocal coupling
between neurons.
The same synaptic mechanisms were responsible for traveling
patterns in one-dimensional chains and two-dimensional lattices of
RE cells. In particular, the speed of the two-dimensional waves was
close to that of traveling waves in a one-dimensional RE network.
The same conditions on cellular and network parameters generated
propagating activity patterns in all of the networks studied. In its
oscillatory mode, the average membrane potentials of RE cells in a
two-dimensional RE network varied with frequencies from 2 to 10
Hz depending on the absolute levels of the membrane potentials.
The frequency increased with depolarization until it reached around
10 Hz just below the chloride reversal potential, which is close to the
frequency of spindle oscillations recorded in the isolated RE nucleus in vivo9. At relatively hyperpolarized levels of membrane potential, the network oscillations were maintained through the
re-excitation of RE cells by the circulating waves of bursting neurons. When cells were sufficiently depolarized, the spatiotemporal
activity in the RE network no longer resembled rotating spirals but
became more or less irregular. The remaining synchrony of network
activity was reflected in occasional 9–10 Hz population oscillations,
lasting 0.5–1 second and separated by epochs of less regular oscillations (see Fig. 8b). A similar temporal pattern of alternations was
observed in a previous network model of RE cells depolarized above
the chloride reversal potential, where coherent oscillatory activity
was accompanied by travelling waves11. However, in that model, the
oscillations were driven by GABAA-receptor-mediated hyperpolarization followed by rebound bursts in RE cells.
The proposed mechanism of reciprocal excitation between
GABAergic cells is not unique to the RE nucleus of the thalamus.
In-vitro recordings from hippocampal slices have revealed that some
GABAergic synapses between interneurons and onto pyramidal neurons could function as excitatory synapses33–35. This effect could be
explained by the depolarizing component of GABAA receptor IPSPs
whose reversal potential depends on the chloride concentration difference across the plasma membrane36,37.
Spike-bursting activity in RE nuclei may be important in initiating sequences of spindle oscillations in the intact RE–TC network.
Depolarization of TC cells during a sequence of spindle oscillations
terminates oscillations in these cells but may also trigger a set of patterns propagating through the RE network (M.B., I.T., M.S. and
T.J.S., unpublished). Slow repolarization of TC cells during an internature neuroscience • volume 2 no 2 • february 1999

Frequency (Hz)

spindle lull deinactivates the low-threshold calcium current, so the
local RE-evoked IPSPs could trigger a new spindle sequence. In-vivo
data presented here indicate that persistent activity in an RE nucleus during interspindle intervals occurs at low frequencies (0.3–3
Hz). This confirms the suggestion that the mechanism underlying
this activity is based on the reversal of GABAA receptor IPSPs followed by calcium spikes in RE cells. If this hypothesis is correct, then
persistent low-frequency activity in the RE nucleus will lead to the
more or less simultaneous (within 1 to 2 cycles of spindle oscillations) activation of new spindle sequences at different thalamic foci,
whereas transient patterns will result in nonsynchronous initiation
of spatially localized spindle sequences. Future experiments will test
these predictions.
In a previous model of spindle oscillations, new spindle
sequences were triggered without persistent activity inside the RE
network by including spontaneously oscillating (initiator) TC cells38.
Our model predicts that even in the absence of such TC cells, the
RE nucleus could initiate sequences of spindle oscillations in thalamocortical networks in vivo.
METHODS
In-vivo recordings. In-vivo experiments were done on 46 unilaterally decorticated cats and 52 cats with intact thalamocortical connections. All animals
were maintained under ketamine and xylazine (10–15 mg/kg and 2–3 mg/kg,
i.m.) anesthesia. In addition, tissues to be incised and pressure points were
infiltrated with lidocaine. The EEG from the intact hemisphere was continuously recorded, and additional doses of anesthetics were administered at
the slightest tendency toward an increase in frequency and decrease in amplitude of EEG field potentials. The cats were paralyzed with gallamine triethiodide and artificially ventilated to the end-tidal CO2 of 3.5–3.8%. The
heartbeat was monitored and kept constant (acceptable range, 90–110
beats/min). Body temperature was maintained at 37–39oC. Glucose saline
(5% glucose, 10 ml i.p.) was given every 3–4 h during the experiments, which
lasted for 8–14 h. The stability of intracellular recordings was ensured by
cisternal drainage, bilateral pneumothorax, hip suspension and filling the
hole made in the skull with a solution of agar-agar (4%). All experimental
procedures were done according to national guidelines.
For microelectrode recordings from thalamic RE neurons, the surface of
the cortex that corresponds to the anterior half of the marginal and suprasylvian gyri was cauterized with silver nitrate. The cortex and white matter
were removed by suction until the head of the caudate nucleus was exposed.
Micropipettes were then lowered through the head of the caudate nucleus
to reach the rostrolateral sector of the RE nucleus. Intracellular recordings
were made with conventional sharp electrodes filled with a 2.5 M solution of
potassium acetate (DC resistance of 30–70 MΩ). Stable intracellular recordings had resting membrane potentials more negative than –55 mV and over173

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

© 1999 Nature America Inc. • http://neurosci.nature.com

shooting action potentials. Stimulations of the ventrolateral (VL) thalamic
nucleus and motor cortical area 4 were delivered with variable durations
(0.05–0.2 ms) and intensities (0.05–0.3 mA). To suppress cortical activity in
5 experiments, the 2 M solution of potassium acetate was washed over the
cortical surface in area 4. Multi-neuron activity in the RE nucleus was recorded with tungsten microelectrodes (resistance 7–10 MΩ). At the end of an
experiment, the animal was given a lethal dose of pentobarbital.
Computational model. We examined a single-compartment model of an
RE cell, which included voltage-dependent currents described by HodgkinHuxley kinetics:
dV = –g (V – E ) – Iint – Isyn
Cm —
(1)
L
L
dt
where Cm = 1 µ/cm2 is the membrane capacitance, gL = 0.05 mS/cm2 is the
leakage conductance, EL = –77 mV is the reversal potential, Iint is a sum of
active intrinsic currents (Iintj) and Isyn is a sum of synaptic currents (Isynj).
The area of the RE cell was SRE = 1.43 x 10–4 cm2. The set of intrinsic currents included a fast sodium current INa, a fast potassium current IK (ref. 39),
a low-threshold calcium current IT (refs. 40, 41) and a potassium leak current
IKL = gKL(V – EKL). The expressions for the transition rates of all currents
are given in ref. 23.
GABAA receptor synaptic current was modeled by a first-order activation
scheme42 and was calculated according to the equation:
Isyn = gsyn [O] (V–Esyn)

(2)

where gsyn is the maximal conductivity, [O](t) is the fraction of open channels
and Esyn = –70 (ref. 12) is the reversal potential. The decay time constant of the
GABAA synapses between RE cells was varied from 10 ms to 100 ms43 to
ensure the robustness of the results. We found that the main difference
between the models with slow and fast synaptic decay kinetics was the duration of the burst discharges in RE cells, which was reduced slightly when slower kinetics was used. The rest of the parameters were the same as in ref. 23.
We simulated two network models: (1) A one-dimensional chain of
M = 100 RE cells and (2) a two-dimensional lattice of M × M (33 × 33
and 50 × 50) RE cells. In the first model, each RE cell xi (i ∈ [1,M]) was
connected with ± N nearest cells (xj, j ∈ [i-N,i+N], N = 1 to 9), and in
the second model each RE cell (xi,j) was connected with all cells inside a
circuit with radius N = 4 cells (xk,l, (k,l) ∈ S, S = {(k,l): k2+l2 ≤ N2 }).
Flow boundary conditions (V j = V j′ , j′ = –j+1 if j ∈ [–N+1,0],
j′ = 2M–j+1 if j ∈ [M+1,M+N] in one dimension or Vk.l = Vk′,l′ in two
dimensions with the same rules for calculation k′ and l′) were used to
reduce the effect of the boundaries. The maximal conductance for IKL
was initialized with some random variability (variance σ ∼ 10%) through
the network to insure the robustness of the results 23.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the Sloan
Center for Theoretical Neurobiology, the Human Frontier Science Program and the
Medical Research Council of Canada.

RECEIVED 14 SEPTEMBER; ACCEPTED 16 NOVEMBER 1998
1. Steriade, M., Deschênes, M., Domich, L. & Mulle, C. Abolition of spindle
oscillations in thalamic neurons disconnected from nucleus reticularis thalami.
J. Neurophysiol. 54, 1473–1497 (1985).
2. Steriade, M. & Llinás, R. R. The functional states of the thalamus and the
associated neuronal interplay. Physiol. Rev. 68, 649–742 (1988).
3. Steriade, M., Jones, E. G. & Llinás, R. R. Thalamic Oscillations and Signaling
(Wiley, New York, 1990).
4. von Krosigk, M., Bal, T. & McCormick, D. A. Cellular mechanisms of a
synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science 261, 361–364 (1993).
5. Steriade, M., McCormick, D. A. & Sejnowski, T. J. Thalamocortical oscillations
in the sleeping and aroused brain. Science 262, 679–685 (1993).
6. Bal, T. & McCormick, D. A. What stops synchronized thalamocortical
oscillations? Neuron 17, 297–308 (1996).
7. Budde, T., Biella, G., Munsch, T. & Pape, H. C. Lack of regulation by
intracellular Ca2+ of the hyperpolarization-activated cation current in rat
thalamic neurones. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 503, 79–85 (1997).
8. Lüthi, A., Bal, B. & McCormick, D. A. Periodicity of thalamic spindle waves is
abolished by ZD7288, a blocker of Ih. J. Neurophysiol. 79, 3284–3289 (1998).
9. Steriade, M., Domich, L., Oakson, G. & Deschênes, M. The deafferented
reticular thalamic nucleus generates spindle rhythmicity. J. Neurophysiol. 57,
260–273 (1987).

174

10. Golomb, D., Wang, X. J. & Rinzel, J. Synchronization properties of spindle
oscillations in a thalamic reticular nucleus model. J. Neurophysiol. 72,
1109–1126 (1994).
11. Destexhe, A., Contreras, D., Sejnowski, T. J. & Steriade, M. A model of spindle
rhythmicity in the isolated thalamic reticular nucleus. J. Neurophysiol. 72,
803–818 (1994).
12. Ulrich, D. & Huguenard, J. R. Nucleus-specific chloride homeostasis in rat
thalamus. J. Neurosci. 17, 2348–2354 (1997).
13. Ulrich, D. & Huguenard, J. R. γ-Aminobutyric acid type B receptor-dependent
burst-firing in thalamic neurons: A dynamic clamp study. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 93, 13245–13249 (1996).
14. Contreras, D., Curró Dossi, R. & Steriade, M. Electrophysiological properties
of cat reticular thalamic neurones in vivo. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 470, 273–294
(1993).
15. Domich, L., Oakson, G. & Steriade, M. Thalamic burst patterns in the naturally
sleeping cat: a comparison between cortically projecting and reticularis
neurones. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 379, 429–449 (1986).
16. Contreras, D. & Steriade, M. Cellular basis of EEG slow rhythms: a study of
dynamic corticothalamic relationships. J. Neurosci. 15, 604–622 (1995).
17. Destexhe, A., Contreras, D., Steriade, M., Sejnowski, T. J. & Huguenard, J. R. In
vivo, in vitro, and computational analysis of dendritic calcium currents in
thalamic reticular neurons. J. Neurosci. 16, 169–185, (1996).
18. Contreras, D., Timofeev, I. & Steriade, M. Mechanisms of long-lasting
hyperpolarizations underlying slow sleep oscillations in cat corticothalamic
networks. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 494, 251–264 (1996).
19. Steriade, M., Jones, E. G. & McCormick, D. A. Thalamus: Organization and
Function (Elsevier, Oxford, 1997).
20. Timofeev, I. & Steriade, M. Low-frequency rhythms in the thalamus of intactcortex and decorticated cats. J. Neurophysiol. 76, 4152–4168 (1996).
21. Ulrich, D. & Huguenard, J. R. GABAA-receptor-mediated rebound burst firing
and burst shunting in thalamus. J. Neurophysiol. 78, 1748–1751 (1997).
22. Timofeev, I. & Steriade, M. Cellular mechanisms underlying intrathalamic
augmenting responses of reticular and relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 79,
2716–2729 (1998).
23. Bazhenov, M., Timofeev, I., Steriade, M. & Sejnowski, T. J. Cellular and
network models for intrathalamic augmenting responses during 10 Hz
stimulation. J. Neurophysiol. 79, 2730–2748 (1998).
24. Golomb, D. & Amitai, Y. Propagating neuronal discharges in neocortical slices:
Computational and experimental study. J. Neurophysiol. 78, 1199–1211 (1997).
25. Golomb, D. Models of neuronal transient synchrony during propagation of
activity through neocortical circuitry. J. Neurophysiol. 79, 1–12 (1998).
26. Rinzel, J., Termal, D., Wang, X. J. & Ermentrout, B. Propagating activity
patterns in large-scale inhibitory neuronal networks. Science 279, 1351–1355
(1998).
27. Traub, R. D., Miles, R. & Jefferys, J. G. R. Synaptic and intrinsic conductances
shape picrotoxin-induced synchronized after-discharges in the guinea-pig
hippocampal slice. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 461, 525–547 (1993).
28. Traub, R. D., Miles, R. & Jefferys, J. G. R. Analysis of the propagation of
disinhibition-induced after-discharges along the guinea-pig hippocampal slice
in vitro. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 472, 267–287 (1993).
29. Kuramoto, Y. Chemical Oscillations, Waves, and Turbulence (Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1984).
30. Coullet, P., Gil, L. & Lega, J. Defect-mediated turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett. 62,
1619–1622 (1989).
31. Bazhenov, M. & Rabinovich, M. Synchronized disorder in a 2D complex
Ginzburg-Landau equation. Physica D 73, 318–334 (1994).
32. Winfree, A. When Time Breaks Down (Springer, New York, 1987).
33. Michelson, H. B. & Wong, R. K. S. Excitatory synaptic responses mediated by
GABAA receptors in the hippocampus. Science 253, 1420–1423 (1991).
34. Michelson, H. B. & Wong, R. K. S. Synchronization of inhibitory neurones in
the guinea-pig hippocampus in vitro. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 477, 35–45 (1994).
35. Staley, K. J., Soldo, B. L. & Proctor, W. R. Ionic mechanisms of neuronal
excitation by inhibitory GABAA receptors. Science 269, 977–981 (1995).
36. Nicoll, R. A., Malenka, R. C. & Kauer, J. A. Functional comparison of
neurotransmitter receptor subtypes in mammalian central nervous system.
Physiol. Rev. 70, 513–565 (1990).
37. Qian, N. & Sejnowski, T. J. When is an inhibitory synapse effective. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 87, 8145–8149 (1990).
38. Destexhe, A., Bal, T., McCormick, D. A. & Sejnowski, T. J. Ionic mechanisms
underlying synchronized oscillations and propagating waves in a model of
ferret thalamic slices. J. Neurophysiol. 76, 2049–2070 (1996).
39. Traub, R. D. & Miles, R. Neuronal Networks of the Hippocampus (Cambridge,
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1991).
40. Huguenard, J. R. & Prince, D. A. A novel T-type current underlies prolonged
Ca2+-dependent burst firing in GABAergic neurons of rat thalamic reticular
nucleus. J. Neurosci. 12, 3804–3817 (1992).
41. Huguenard, J. R. & McCormick, D. A. Simulation of the currents involved in
rhythmic oscillations in thalamic relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 68, 1373–1383
(1992).
42. Destexhe, A., Mainen, Z. F. & Sejnowski, T. J. Synthesis of models for excitable
membranes, synaptic transmission and neuromodulation using a common
kinetic formalism. J. Comp. Neurosci. 1, 195–230 (1994).
43. Zhang, S. J., Huguenard, J. R. & Prince, D. A. GABAA receptor-mediated Cl–
currents in rat thalamus reticular and relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 78,
2280–2286 (1997).

nature neuroscience • volume 2 no 2 • february 1999

