© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

The impact of ‘bursting’ thalamic
impulses at a neocortical synapse
Harvey A. Swadlow1 and Alexander G. Gusev1,2
1 Department of Psychology, The University of Connecticut, 406 Babbidge Road, Storrs, Connecticut 06269, USA
2 Moscow Brain Research Institute, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow 103064, Russia

Correspondence should be addressed to H.A.S. (swadlow@psych.psy.uconn.edu)

Considerable effort has gone into understanding the mechanisms underlying high-frequency ‘bursting’ of thalamocortical impulses, their sensory information content and their involvement in perception. However, little is known about the influence of such impulses on their cortical targets. Here we
follow bursting thalamic impulses to their terminus at the thalamocortical synapse of the awake rabbit, and examine their influence on a class of somatosensory cortical neurons. We show that
thalamic bursts potently activate cortical circuits. Initial impulses of each burst have a greatly
enhanced ability to elicit cortical action potentials, and later impulses in the burst further raise the
probability of eliciting spikes. In some cases, multiple cortical spikes result from a single burst.
Moreover, we show that the interval preceding each burst is crucial for generating the enhanced
cortical response. The powerful activation of neocortex by thalamocortical bursts is fully consistent
with an involvement of these impulses in perceptual/attentional processes.

Neurons of the mammalian thalamus provide a gateway
through which all sensory information other than olfaction
must pass before reaching the neocortex. Thalamic neurons
operate in two distinct modes that regulate the transfer of sensory information to the neocortex1–3. When subjects are awake
and vigilant, thalamic neurons are generally in ‘relay’ mode:
impulses occur at high and regular rates, and synaptic transmission through the thalamus is faithful. However, when subjects are inattentive, drowsy or anesthetized, thalamic cells are
generally in ‘burst’ mode. Here, transmission through the thalamus is less reliable, and impulses occur at low and irregular
rates punctuated by high-frequency ‘bursts.’ The association of
burst mode with sleep and anesthetic states has led to suggestions that thalamic nuclei may be functionally disconnected
from neocortex during these periods. However, bursts may
occur in the fully awake state4–7, and decoupling of thalamic
neurons from their sensory inputs is selective8. Indeed, dorsal
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGND) neurons are highly sensitive
to some types of visual stimulation during these periods9, and
the information content of each burst is high10.
These and other properties of thalamic burst mode have
led to suggestions that bursts could serve as ‘attentional searchlights’11 or as ‘wake-up calls’12 to sensory neocortex for novel
and potentially interesting or dangerous stimuli. However,
these hypotheses require thalamocortical synapses to be effective during burst mode. Although synaptic transmission
between sensory afferents and dorsal thalamic relay nuclei has
been extensively studied during these periods, we have no comparable information about what occurs at the thalamocortical
synapse. On the one hand, thalamocortical synaptic transmission may be weakened considerably during burst mode because
of the reduction in cholinergic inputs to both thalamus and
cortex during periods of drowsiness and sleep13–15. Indeed, a
402

reduced gain or ‘transfer ratio’ is precisely what occurs at the
retinogeniculate synapse during states of drowsiness, sleep and
light anesthesia that are associated with burst mode3,16. Alternatively, thalamocortical efficacy could be facilitated during
burst mode because of presynaptic17,18 (see below) or postsynaptic19,20 mechanisms. The present work directly investigates
this question in the somatosensory thalamocortical system of
the awake rabbit. To do this, we exploited a potent synaptic
connection between ventrobasal (VB) thalamocortical neurons and putative fast-spike GABAergic interneurons (suspected inhibitory interneurons, SINs) of the topographically
aligned somatosensory cortical barrel column21–24. We recorded extracellular action potentials from these populations and
used cross-correlation methods to examine the efficacy with
which the first and subsequent impulses generated by a bursting thalamocortical neuron elicit action potentials in cortical
SINs. Our strategy was to compare the efficacy values generated from bursting thalamic spikes with those generated from
the entire spike train of the thalamic neuron (the control efficacy25). Our results show that bursting thalamic impulses powerfully activate neocortical circuits, and are consistent with an
involvement of thalamocortical bursts in attentional mechanisms of sensory neocortex.

RESULTS
Relay mode and burst mode in VB thalamus
Rabbits generally sat quietly during recording sessions. The eyes
were kept open, and we observed only occasional small body
movements. Under these conditions, the overall rate of ‘spontaneous’ VB impulses varied considerably. Some seconds or minutes would pass when the spontaneous activity of all recorded
thalamic neurons was high and few bursts occurred. This would
be followed by variable periods during which the spontaneous
nature neuroscience • volume 4 no 4 • april 2001

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

Fig. 1. Relay mode and burst mode in VB thalamus
(a) Transition from ‘relay’ mode to ‘burst’ mode. Upper
traces, ∼10 s of records from the spike trains of two thalamocortical neurons (VB1 and VB2) recorded via two microelectrodes separated by ∼160 microns. Vertical lines,
individual action potentials; vertical line with black circle
above, bursts of 2–5 action potentials. (The separate action
potentials within the bursts cannot be resolved at this time
scale.) Left, neurons in ‘relay mode,’ showing high rates of firing and only a single burst of action potentials. After about
4 s, the firing rate decreases, and the number of bursts
increase. Lower trace shows that hippocampal EEG activity is
correlated with these different firing patterns. During relay
mode, theta activity is seen in the hippocampal EEG. This
changes to high-voltage, irregular activity (HVIR) during burst
mode. Summed FFT power spectra (946-ms samples) of all
hippocampal EEG segments classified as being dominated by
theta (b) and HVIR (c). The maximal value in each distribution was normalized to a value of 1. (d) Burst cross-correlogram, the correlation between the initial spike in each burst
of neuron VB1 and VB2 (a). (e) Autocorrelograms of the
spike trains of neurons VB1 (top) and VB2 (bottom).

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

a

b

c

d

e

impulse activity of VB neurons decreased, and burst responses
were common. The irregular and bursting responses readily converted to high, regular firing either spontaneously, or after auditory or tactile stimulation. EEG recordings from the hippocampus
confirmed that the periods of regular firing at high rates were
associated with ‘theta’ activity (in the 4–8 Hz range, a sign of
arousal26). In contrast, bursts and low spontaneous firing rates
were associated with high-voltage, irregular activity (HVIR), a
sign of drowsiness, inattention and sleep.
In one such recording session (Fig. 1a), two thalamocortical neurons (VB1 and VB2) were recorded simultaneously from
the same VB barreloid using two microelectrodes separated by
∼160 microns. Hippocampal EEG activity (Fig. 1a, lower trace)
shows that the initial several seconds of this record are dominated by theta activity. During this period, spontaneous VB
activity was high in both neurons, and a single burst response
occurred (circles above vertical lines; individual spikes within
the bursts cannot be resolved at this time scale). Within about
one second, however, the EEG converted to HVIR activity, when
spontaneous activity of VB neurons was much lower, and bursts
were common. To quantify this relationship, we segmented data
files into periods dominated by either hippocampal theta activity or by HVIR activity. Files were segmented by visual inspection (without knowledge of VB neuronal activity), aided by fast

Fourier transforms (FFT) of each segment. In this manner,
20–55% of each data file was classified as ‘theta,’ and 30–40%
was classified as ‘HVIR.’ The remaining portions of the files
could not be classified. For each of six VB neurons studied in
this manner, baseline spontaneous firing rate was approximately
two times higher during the periods of theta activity (paired
t-test, p ≤ 0.0001; Table 1), but bursts were 8–20 times more
prevalent during HVIR activity (paired t-test, p = 0.001). The
summed FFT power spectra for theta and HVIR segments
obtained from the entire data file that yielded the two neurons
in Fig. 1a (Fig. 1b and c) had theta segments dominated by frequencies of 4–7 Hz, but HVIR segments with considerably more
power in both lower and higher frequencies. A ‘burst cross-correlogram’ (for the initial spike in each burst) was calculated for
these two VB neurons (Fig. 1d), and no sharp synchrony was
seen. However, bursts showed some broad synchrony, with a
half- amplitude response of somewhat less than one second.
Very similar burst cross-correlograms were seen for each of 14
pairs of VB neurons. Each member of each pair of VB neurons
emitted more than 100 bursts, and each pair was located within the same VB barreloid and recorded on separate electrodes
that were spaced at approximately 160 microns. No clear rhythmicity, other than a preferred inter-burst interval of 150–300
ms, occurred in the ‘burst autocorrelograms’ (autocorrelogram

Table 1. Frequency for different classes of spike activity in each of six VB neurons that were studied during recording of
hippocampal EEG activity.
VB neuron
1
2
3
4
5
6
Mean ± s.d.

Spikes/s
Theta
HVIR
13.90
6.11
22.20
11.00
18.00
6.99
17.00
7.04
17.7
7.13
21.80
11.9
18.43 ± 3.13
8.36 ± 2.44

Bursts/s
Theta
0.040
0.021
0.014
0.060
0.012
0.041
0.03 ± 0.02

HVIR
0.452
0.244
0.265
0.468
0.256
0.565
0.38 ± 0.14

Isolated spikes/s
Theta
HVIR
1.2
1.19
0.169
0.781
0.291
0.911
0.903
1.05
0.269
1.17
0.714
1.06
0.59 ± 0.41
1.03 ± 0.16

Pseudo-bursts/s
Theta
HVIR
0.929
0.132
0.138
0.032
0.077
0.021
0.732
0.143
0.073
0.024
0.563
0.169
0.42 ± 0.37
0.09 ± 0.07

The EEG was segmented into periods that were dominated by theta activity or by high-voltage irregular activity (HVIR).

nature neuroscience • volume 4 no 4 • april 2001

403

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

Fig. 2. Methods and results from one
a
experiment. (a) An extracellular microelectrode recorded the spontaneous
action potentials of a single VB thalamocortical neuron, while two electrodes
recorded the spikes of two cortical SINs
(SIN x and y). All correlograms were
constructed using a bin width of 0.1 ms
and were calculated in the absence of
any stimulation. (b) Cross-correlograms
were initially calculated using the entire
spike trains of the VB neuron (vertical
arrows, 68,345 spikes), SINx (128,096
spikes) and SINy (184,006 spikes). An
b
c
d
index of the potency of this functional
connectivity is given by the efficacy,
which was computed for a period of
0.6 ms on either side of the peak in the
cross-correlogram (indicted by horizontal lines above the peaks in the crosscorrelograms). The computed efficacies
of 0.209 and 0.128 indicate an extremely
potent synaptic contact between the VB
neuron and these two SINs. The ratio of
the numbers of SIN spikes in the peak of
each correlogram (minus the baseline)
and the number of VB spikes used in the
calculations is given beside each peak.
(c) Method for selecting only initial
spikes in a thalamocortical burst and
e
computing the cross-correlograms
based on these spikes. We selected only
the first spike in each burst (vertical
arrow) and computed the cross-correlogram with each SIN. This resulted in an
enhanced efficacy for these selected VB
spikes. (d) Method for selecting only isolated VB spikes and computed crosscorrelograms based on these spikes. The
duration of the interval preceding such
spikes was chosen to match those seen
in the burst condition (c, see Methods).
These isolated VB spikes were highly potent in activating the cortical SINs. (e) For these same neurons, the duration of the required silent interval
that preceded a VB spike was varied from 0 to 750 ms. Efficacy values were clearly related to the duration of this interval. All cross-correlograms
were normalized for spike rate. The vertical scale bar in (b) applies to all correlograms, represents 500 and 100 spikes per second in the VB–SINx and
VB–SINy correlograms, respectively.

of the initial spike in each burst) for the 2 VB neurons shown
in Fig. 1a (Fig. 1e), or in 15 other such burst autocorrelograms.
The impact of the initial spike in a burst
Of more than 50 VB–SIN pairs studied, we selected a subset for
detailed analysis that showed evidence of very potent synaptic connectivity (efficacy values of greater than 5%). In one case
(Fig. 2), an extracellular microelectrode recorded the spontaneous
action potentials of a single VB thalamocortical neuron, and two
additional electrodes, located in the topographically aligned S1
cortical barrel, recorded the spikes of two SINs (SINx and SINy;
Fig. 2a). Our initial cross-correlation analyses (Fig. 2b) were done
using the entire spike trains of the VB neuron (more than 68,000
spikes) and the SINs (more than 120,000 spikes each). This analysis revealed a potent functional connectivity between the VB neuron and both of the SINs. In these correlograms, the VB spike
occurs at ‘0’ delay, and the cortical spike follows after a brief delay.
A very brief (∼1 ms) and potent increase in spike rate occurs at
intervals of 1.1–2 ms following the VB action potential23. An index
404

of the potency of this functional connectivity is given by the ‘efficacy.’ This value compares the number of SIN spikes in the peak
(± 0.6 ms) of each cross correlogram with the total number of VB
spikes25 (see Methods). Computed efficacies were 0.209 and 0.128,
between the VB neuron and SINs x and y, respectively, which indicates an extremely potent synaptic contact between the VB neuron and these two SINs. Next, we identified 1216 bursts of action
potentials that occurred within the spike train of the VB neuron
during the two hours of this recording session (Fig. 2c). We then
selected the first spike in each of these bursts (vertical arrow) and
computed the cross-correlogram of these selected spikes with the
spike trains of each SIN. The efficacy of the initial VB spike in each
burst was calculated in a manner identical to that of the control
efficacy, around the peak in the cross-correlogram (± 0.6 ms).
Burst efficacy increased to 0.426 and 0.184 for SINx and SINy,
respectively. Similar increases in the efficacy for the initial spike in
the thalamocortical burst were seen in each of the seven VB–SIN
pairs studied, with mean efficacy values more than doubling
(mean, 221% of the control value; p = 0.005, paired t-test).
nature neuroscience • volume 4 no 4 • april 2001

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

a

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

b

c
d

Fig. 3. Thalamocortical efficacy of first and second impulses of bursts
and pseudo-bursts. (a–d) Analysis for one of the VB–SIN pairs shown in
Fig. 2 (VB–SINx) of thalamocortical efficacy of the first and second
spikes in bursts (n = 1216) and pseudo-bursts (n = 2453). (a, b) Crosscorrelogram generated by the first and second spike, respectively, in
each burst. (c, d) Correlograms generated by the first and second spike
of pseudo-bursts. For analyses generated by the second VB spike in
bursts/pseudo-bursts (b, d), arrows indicate the increase in SIN spike
probability that was due to the initial VB spike. Efficacy values for these
analyses are calculated identically to that described in Fig. 2, with the
exception that the ‘chance’ levels of responding are based on the interval of from –50 ms to –10 ms preceding each spike. All cross-correlograms are normalized for spike rate (vertical scale bar, 500 spikes/s; bin
width, 0.1 ms). (e) The summed results for the six VB–SIN pairs studied
in this manner. The efficacies of the first and second spike in each burst
and pseudo-burst are presented, normalized with respect to the control
efficacy for each VB–SIN pair (the efficacy as calculated for the entire
data file). Error bars indicate the standard deviation values for the combined normalized efficacies generated by the first and second spike of
each burst/pseudo-burst.

e

The interval preceding the initial spike in a burst
The enhanced efficacy of initial spikes in a thalamic burst could
be due to a variety of postsynaptic or presynaptic mechanisms.
One simple explanation is related to the long interspike interval that precedes each thalamic burst. In the slice preparation,
thalamocortical synapses demonstrate a pronounced pairedpulse depression that lasts for several hundred milliseconds17,18.
In the awake state, most thalamic neurons have spontaneous
activity levels of more than 10 spikes per second (for example,
see Table 1), and thalamocortical synapses, therefore, could be
in a chronic state of depression. The pause in firing that necessarily precedes a thalamic burst could relieve this depression
and produce a larger-amplitude EPSP on the postsynaptic
membrane. If this is the case, single, isolated thalamic spikes
that are preceded by silent periods comparable to those seen
before thalamic bursts should also show an enhanced efficacy
in eliciting spikes in cortical SINs. We found that this is indeed
the case (Fig. 2d). The 1216 bursts recorded in this VB neuron
followed the preceding spike at a median interval of 278 ms.
Therefore, isolated VB spikes were selected that occurred at a
similar interval following the preceding spike (median value,
280 ms, matched interval condition; Fig. 2d, vertical arrow;
Methods). These isolated VB spikes were highly potent in activating the cortical neurons, showing efficacies of 0.404 and
0.204 in SINs x and y, respectively (Fig. 2d). These values are
very similar to those seen under the burst condition (Fig. 2c).
The magnitude of the enhanced thalamocortical efficacy for
these neurons was clearly related to the duration of the ‘silent’
period that preceded the VB spike (Fig. 2e). Similar increases
in the efficacy for such isolated VB spikes (with matched preceding interval) were seen in each of the seven VB–SIN pairs
studied, with mean efficacy values nearly doubling (mean, 174%
of the control value; p = 0.013, paired t-test).
nature neuroscience • volume 4 no 4 • april 2001

To further examine the involvement of the interval that precedes each burst, we compared the thalamocortical efficacy of
bursts with those of ‘pseudo-bursts.’ Like normal bursts (see Methods), pseudo-bursts were required to consist of at least two spikes,
at interspike intervals of less than 4 ms. Unlike normal bursts,
however, pseudo-bursts had no lengthy preceding interval, and
were required to have at least one spike in the interval of
10–80 ms preceding the initial spike in the pseudo-burst. Our
analysis compared the thalamocortical efficacy of the initial two
spikes of regular bursts with those of such pseudo-bursts (Fig. 3),
and showed that the peaks in the cross-correlograms in response
to both the first and second VB spikes are considerably stronger in
bursts than in pseudo-bursts (Fig. 3a–d). In each of the VB–SIN
pairs studied, the combined efficacy of the first two spikes was
greater in normal bursts than in pseudo-bursts (p < 0.001, paired
t-test). The mean efficacy values of the first and second thalamic
spike in each burst and pseudo-burst were normalized with respect
to the control efficacy for each pair (the efficacy as calculated for
the entire data file; Fig. 3e).
The impact of later spikes in a burst
The above analysis shows that the second spike in thalamocortical bursts (and pseudo-bursts) contributed to the cortical
response. Moreover, inspection of the cross-correlograms generated by the initial spike of a burst (Fig. 2c) show prolonged
secondary peaks (arrows) following the sharp initial peaks,
which are not seen in Fig. 2b or d. For the seven VB–SIN pairs
studied, we analyzed the thalamocortical efficacy of later spikes
in a burst in which the preceding spikes all failed to generate
cortical action potentials (Fig. 4a). We compared the thalamocortical efficacy for initial spikes in a burst (Fig. 4a, left bar)
with those of the second spike (Fig. 4a, middle bar) or third
spike (Fig. 4a, right bar). Thalamocortical synaptic efficacy
remains slightly above control values under these conditions
for both the second and third spike in the burst.
We also asked whether the multiple spikes of a thalamocortical burst can elicit multiple impulses in their cortical targets. For
example, it is possible that cortical spikes in the peak of the crosscorrelogram in Fig. 3b were elicited by the second spike of the VB
burst only when the first VB spike failed to elicit a cortical spike.
We showed for this same VB–SIN pair that this is not the case
(Fig. 4b). A cross-correlogram was generated by selecting for
405

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

Fig. 4. The impact of later spikes in a burst. (a) Thalamocortical efficacy
of later spikes in a burst when the initial spike(s) fail to elicit a cortical
response. For the seven VB–SIN pairs under study, efficacy of the initial
spike in the burst (left) is compared with the efficacy of the second (middle) and third (right) spike in the burst under these conditions. Error
bars, s.d. (b) For the same VB–SIN pair shown in Fig. 3, we selected for
analysis only the second spike in each VB burst, under conditions in
which the first VB spike was successful (arrow) in eliciting a cortical
spike. The resulting efficacy of the second spike remained high (0.176),
showing that bursts in single VB neurons can elicit multiple spikes in
their targets. (c) We analyzed only the third spike in each VB burst,
under conditions in which the first VB spike was successful (arrow), but
the second was not. (d) Only the fourth spike in each VB burst is
selected for analysis, under conditions when the first VB spike was successful (arrow), and the second and third spike in the burst were not
successful. All cross-correlograms are normalized for spike rate (vertical scale bar, 500 spikes/s; bin width, 0.1 ms).

analysis only the second spike in each VB burst, under conditions
in which the first VB spike was successful in eliciting a cortical
spike (Fig. 4b, arrow). Even under these conditions, the efficacy
of the second spike was very high (0.176), showing that bursts in
single VB neurons can elicit multiple spikes in their targets. We
then selected for analysis only the third spike in each VB burst
(Fig. 4c), under conditions in which the first VB spike was successful (arrow), but the second VB spike was not successful in eliciting a cortical spike. Finally, we selected for analysis only the
fourth spike in each VB burst (Fig. 4d), under conditions in which
the first VB spike was successful (arrow), and the second and third
spikes in the burst were not successful. Efficacies remain at a very
high level under all conditions for this very strongly connected
VB–SIN pair. These data show that the sequential impulses of single bursts that occur in some potently connected VB neurons may
elicit multiple action potentials in cortical target neurons.
Thalamocortical efficacy and EEG state
Bursts were relatively rare during hippocampal theta, and pseudo-bursts were rare during HVIR (Table 1). Because of this, we
could not compare thalamocortical efficacy of these events
between the two EEG states. However, we could compare, across
EEG states, the thalamocortical efficacy of ‘isolated’ VB spikes
with long preceding interspike intervals (see above). These spikes
are of special interest because they may be generated by the same
underlying mechanism (low-threshold calcium spike) that generates thalamic burst responses6. In each of the five VB–SIN pairs
that were adequately studied under both states, thalamocortical
efficacy of such isolated spikes was similarly enhanced over control values (mean ± s.d., 183 ± 21% of control values during theta
activity; 177 ± 27% of control values during HVIR activity).

DISCUSSION
High-frequency bursts of action potentials are characteristic of many
neuronal populations, and their involvement in neural information processing has generated considerable interest19. In some systems that demonstrate paired-pulse facilitation, the synaptic efficacy
of later impulses in a burst is much higher than for earlier impulses, and bursting may serve as a kind of high-pass filter18. In other
systems, each spike in the burst has a synaptic efficacy that is similar to that of an ‘average’ spike, but the overall probability of generating at least one postsynaptic spike is higher for bursts than for
single spikes27. The present results show that bursts of thalamocortical impulses generate yet another type of enhanced postsynaptic response. Here, the enhanced activation of cortical neurons
406

a

b

c

d

occurs in two ways: first, the initial impulse of each burst has a
synaptic efficacy that is much higher than that of an average thalamocortical impulse, and second, the efficacy of subsequent impulses within the burst are very near the average value and further raise
the overall probability of successfully eliciting neocortical spikes.
In some strongly connected VB–SIN pairs, multiple cortical spikes
are elicited by the consecutive impulses of a single burst.
Our data suggest that the interval preceding the initial spike
in the burst is a key factor in generating the enhanced synaptic
efficacy to this spike. Thus, we first found a clear relationship
between the duration of this preceding interval and thalamocortical synaptic efficacy. Second, we found that a similar
enhanced thalamocortical efficacy is generated by single isolated spikes (with matched preceding intervals) that are not
part of a burst. Third, we found that the enhanced thalamocortical efficacy generated by such isolated VB spikes is independent of the EEG state (hippocampal theta or HVIR) during
which they occur. Fourth, we found that the initial spike of
pseudo-bursts (which have no preceding spike-free interval)
does not show an enhanced thalamocortical efficacy. Nevertheless, it is possible that hidden postsynaptic factors are correlated with long interspike intervals in VB neurons, and that
these contribute to the enhanced thalamocortical efficacy of
VB bursts and isolated spikes.
Studies showing activity-dependent depression of thalamocortical synapses provide a plausible explanation for the
potent influence of interspike interval on thalamocortical
synaptic efficacy. Thalamocortical synapses onto both spiny
neurons and fast-spike GABAergic interneurons show considerable paired-pulse depression17,18 that gradually recovers over
hundreds of milliseconds. If such activity-dependent depression also occurs at the thalamocortical synapse of adult, intact
subjects, the high levels of spontaneous activity generated by
thalamocortical neurons (for example, see Table 1) would be
expected to result in a chronic state of synaptic depression. In
light of this, it has been suggested6 that the long interval that
necessarily precedes the initial spike of a thalamocortical burst
would allow thalamic neurons to recover from such activitynature neuroscience • volume 4 no 4 • april 2001

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

dependent depression, and that initial spikes in a burst should
evoke a maximum EPSP in postsynaptic targets. Our results
are in full agreement with this suggestion.
Bursting of thalamocortical neurons has often been associated with sleep and anesthetic states1. The present observations in
awake rabbits agree with previous work showing that thalamic
bursting also occurs in the awake state4–7. Thalamocortical bursts
were approximately 12 times more frequent during hippocampal HVIR activity than during theta activity. HVIR has been associated with relaxed immobility, grooming, inattention and
slow-wave sleep in the rabbit, and theta activity has been associated with arousal and alertness, both during movement and during immobility26,28. We believe that our rabbits were awake but
drowsy and inattentive during the HVIR seen in our experiments,
for the following reasons. First, although the eyelids sometimes
drooped, they were always open. Second, rabbits were responsive to sensory stimulation during these periods. An approaching visual stimulus would rapidly convert the HVIR into theta
activity, and theta activity was also generated by low-intensity
auditory or tactile stimulation. Third, hippocampal EEG changed
spontaneously between theta activity and HVIR, sometimes within a period of less than one second (for example, Fig. 1a).
We found that spontaneous bursts were only weakly synchronous, even among VB neurons of the same barreloid. However, work in LGNd shows that bursts are generated at a very
constant latency to very low intensity visual stimulation9. This
suggests that, when in burst mode, many thalamocortical neurons with similar spatial receptive fields would generate synchronous burst responses to even weak sensory stimulation.
Although the present results showing enhanced cortical responses to thalamic bursts were based on spontaneous thalamic and
cortical impulses, we would expect bursts triggered by sensory
events to also show enhanced efficacy at the thalamocortical
synapse. If so, synchronous bursts generated in multiple thalamocortical neurons by even a weak sensory stimulus should, in
turn, generate a powerful postsynaptic cortical response.
It is important to emphasize that our findings are based on
thalamocortical synaptic input to a special class of cortical neuron: putative fast-spike GABAergic interneurons. These neurons
have membrane properties that differ considerably from those of
most cortical neurons18,29. It is possible, therefore, that other cortical populations may respond differently to thalamocortical bursts.
Our results, however, suggest that a recovery from activity-dependent depression underlies the enhanced synaptic efficacy of the
initial spike of a thalamocortical burst. If this is the case, one would
expect a similar enhanced efficacy at the thalamocortical synapse
onto spiny stellate neurons of layer 4. This population shows considerable activity-dependent depression at the thalamocortical
synapse17,18 and receives potent input from a subset of thalamic
afferents30. An enhanced, burst-induced response in both cortical
excitatory (spiny stellate and local pyramidal neurons) and
inhibitory neurons would result in an enhanced early response in
the excitatory population that is swiftly terminated (at a disynaptic delay of ∼1 ms) by powerful feed-forward inhibition21,31. Such
a potent and sharply synchronous cortical excitatory population
response would be well suited to activate target neurons lying
downstream and is consistent with an involvement of thalamocortical bursts in attentional mechanisms of the neocortex4–7,9–11.

METHODS
Extracellular recordings were obtained from somatosensory (S1) cortical
barrel columns and from VB thalamic barreloids of adult, Dutch-belted
rabbits. Initial surgery was done under anesthesia using aseptic procenature neuroscience • volume 4 no 4 • april 2001

dures. Subsequent recordings were obtained in the awake, unanesthetized
state using procedures approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee at the University of Connecticut in accordance with NIH
guidelines. Methods used to ensure the comfort of our subjects have been
described in detail23,24. Rabbits were held snugly within a stocking and
were placed on a foam rubber pad. The steel bar on the head was fastened to a restraining devise in a manner that minimized stress on the
neck. Rabbits generally sat quietly for several hours of each recording
session and then were returned to their home cage.
Microelectrodes were constructed of quartz-platinum filaments
(40 microns, maximum diameter32) that were pulled under high temperature and sharpened to a fine tip. A concentric array of 7–19 such
electrodes (inter-electrode spacing of 160 microns) was chronically
implanted within VB thalamus, with each electrode independently
controlled by a miniature microdrive. Cortical recordings were
obtained from topographically aligned S1 barrels, following mapping
procedures. Cortical recordings were obtained acutely, using 5–7 of
the same type of electrodes described above (electrode spacing
< 160 microns), but positioned using a 7-channel microdrive system33.
VB thalamocortical neurons were identified by spike-triggered averages of field potentials elicited in the aligned S1 barrel31. Cortical SINs
were identified by a high-frequency (> 600 Hz) burst of three or more
spikes elicited by electrical stimulation of VB thalamus23,24 and by
their short-duration action potential22,23,29.
All data were collected in the absence of peripheral stimulation, under
conditions of spontaneous activity. We selected a brief window
(± 0.6 ms on each side of the peak of the cross-correlogram) for calculation of efficacy values. We restricted our analysis to this brief window
because peaks in the thalamocortical cross-correlogram in this system
are comparably short23 and because we wanted to limit the analysis to
the effects of a single presynaptic impulse. Efficacy values were calculated by counting the number of action potentials that occurred in the SIN
during this brief temporal window, subtracting a baseline number of
spikes expected by chance during this period, and dividing this value by
the number of triggering VB spikes. The number of SIN spikes expected
by chance was based on the mean number of spikes per bin that occurred
between –4 ms and +1 ms of the VB spike time. We limited our analysis
to those VB–SIN pairs that showed a control efficacy greater than 0.05. In
addition, we studied only those pairs in which greater than 100 burst
responses of the VB neuron occurred.
Thalamocortical bursts were identified according to previously
described criteria34. Thus, the initial impulse in a burst was required to
be preceded by an interval of at least 100 ms during which no action
potentials occurred and to be followed by another action potential at
an interval of less than 4 ms. Subsequent impulses that occurred at
intervals of less than 4 ms were identified as being part of the burst.
‘Isolated spikes’ (matched interval condition, Fig. 2d) were preceded by
a defined period during which no action potentials occurred, and were
followed by a period greater than 10 ms during which no spikes were permitted. Initially, we selected a value of 100 ms for the period preceding the
isolated spikes. When using this value, however, measured interspike intervals preceding the isolated spike were considerably less than those preceding VB bursts. Therefore, for each VB cell, we lengthened the required
interval preceding the isolated spike until interspike intervals matched
(median values, ± 5 ms) those preceding VB bursts. This required period
varied between 145 and 195 ms for the VB neurons studied in this manner.
Pseudo-bursts consisted of an initial spike that was followed by
another spike at an interval of less than 4 ms and was preceded by at
least one spike at intervals of 10–80 ms. Whereas most bursts consisted
of three or more spikes, most pseudo-bursts consisted of two spikes.
For this reason, we compared only the initial two spikes of bursts and
pseudo-bursts. The procedure for calculating efficacy values to the second spike in a burst/pseudo-burst was complicated by the fact that the
time period usually used for calculating ‘chance’ spike values (between
–4 ms and +1 ms of the VB spike time, above) showed elevated spike
counts due to the cortical spikes that were elicited by the first spike in
the burst (arrows, Fig. 3b and d). For this analysis, therefore, we calculated the ‘chance’ level of responding based on the time period from
10 to 50 ms preceding the VB spike. As in the analyses presented in
407

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

articles

Fig. 2, efficacy values were based on a brief window (± 0.6 ms on each
side of the peak of the cross-correlogram).
Hippocampal EEG was obtained via two platinum-iridium microwires
placed above and below (1-mm vertical separation) the CA1 layer of the
hippocampus.

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group http://neurosci.nature.com

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Supported by grants from NSF (IBN-0077694), NIMH (MH-59322) and the
Russian Foundation of Basic Research (00-04-49163). We thank J.-M. Alonso
and K. Lukatela for discussions and for comments on this manuscript.

RECEIVED 22 NOVEMBER 2000; ACCEPTED 16 FEBRUARY 2001
1. Steriade, M. & Llinas, R. R. The functional states of the thalamus and the
associated neuronal interplay. Physiol. Rev. 68, 649–742 (1988).
2. McCormick, D. A. & Feeser, H. R. Functional implications of burst firing and
single spike activity in lateral geniculate relay neurons. Neuroscience 39,
103–113 (1990).
3. Sherman, S. M. & Koch, C. The control of retinogeniculate transmission in
the mammalian lateral geniculate nucleus. Exp. Brain Res. 63, 1–20 (1986).
4. Guido, W. & Weyand, T. Burst responses in thalamic relay cells of the awake
behaving cat. J. Neurophysiol. 74, 1782–1786 (1995).
5. Ramcharan, E. J., Gnadt, J. W. & Sherman, S. M. Burst and tonic firing in
thalamic cells of unanesthetized, behaving monkeys. Vis. Neurosci. 17, 55–62
(2000).
6. Ramcharan, E. J., Cox, C. L., Zhan, X. J., Sherman, S. M. & Gnadt, J. W.
Cellular mechanisms underlying activity patterns in the monkey thalamus
during visual behavior. J. Neurophysiol. 84, 1982–1987 (2000)
7. Weyand, T. G., Boudreaux, M. & Guido, W. Burst and tonic response modes
in thalamic neurons during sleep and wakefulness. J. Neurophysiol. (in press).
8. Mukherjee, P. & Kaplan, E. Dynamics of neurons in the cat lateral geniculate
nucleus: in vivo electrophysiology and computational modeling.
J. Neurophysiol. 74, 1222–1243 (1995).
9. Guido, W. & Sherman, S. M. Response latencies of cells in the cat’s lateral
geniculate nucleus are less variable during burst than tonic firing. Vis.
Neurosci. 15, 231–237 (1998).
10. Reinagel, P., Godwin, D., Sherman, S. M. & Koch, C. Encoding of visual
information by LGN bursts. J. Neurophysiol. 81, 2558–2569 (1999).
11. Crick, F. Function of the thalamic reticular complex: the searchlight
hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81, 4586–4590 (1984).
12. Sherman, S. M. & Guillery, R. W. Functional organization of thalamocortical
relays. J. Neurophysiol. 76, 1367–1395 (1996).
13. Steriade, M. & Buzsaki, G. in Brain Cholinergic Systems (eds. Steriade, M. &
Buzsaki, G.) 3–62 (Oxford Univ. Press, 1990).
14. Sillito, A. M. & Kemp, J. A. Cholinergic modulation of the functional
organization of the cat visual cortex. Brain Res. 289, 143–155 (1983).
15. Metherate, R. & Ashe, J. H. Nucleus basalis stimulation facilitates
thalamocortical synaptic transmission in the rat auditory cortex. Synapse 14,
132–143 (1993).

408

16. Coenen, A. M. L. & Vendrik, A. J. H. Determination of the transfer ratio of
cat’s geniculate neurons through quasi-intracellular recordings and the
relation with the level of alertness. Exp. Brain. Res. 14, 227–242 (1972).
17. Gil, Z., Connors, B. W. & Amitai, Y. Differential regulation of neocortical
synapses by neuromodulators and activity. Neuron 19, 679–686 (1997).
18. Gibson, J. R., Beierlein, M. & Connors, B. W. Two networks of electrically
coupled inhibitory neurons in neocortex. Nature 402, 75–79 (1999).
19. Lisman, J. E. Bursts as a unit of neural information: making unreliable
synapses reliable. Trends Neurosci. 20, 38–43 (1997).
20. Usrey, W. M., Alonso, J.-M. & Reid, R. C. Synaptic interactions between
thalamic inputs to simple cells in cat visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 20, 5461–5467
(2000).
21. Agmon, A. & Connors, B. W. Correlations between intrinsic firing patterns
and thalamocortical synaptic responses of neurons in mouse barrel cortex.
J. Neurosci. 12, 319–329 (1992).
22. Simons, D. J. & Carvell, G. E. Thalamocortical response transformation in
the rat vibrissa/barrel system. J. Neurophysiol. 61, 311–330 (1989).
23. Swadlow, H. A. The influence of VPM afferents on putative inhibitory
interneurons in S1 of the awake rabbit: evidence from cross-correlation,
microstimulation, and latencies to peripheral sensory stimulation.
J. Neurophysiol. 73, 1584–1599 (1995).
24. Swadlow, H. A., Beloozerova, I. & Sirota, M. Sharp, local synchrony among
putative feed-forward inhibitory interneurons of rabbit somatosensory
cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 79, 567–582 (1998).
25. Levick, W. R., Cleland, G. G. & Dubin, M. W. Lateral geniculate neurons of
cat: retinal inputs and physiology. Invest. Opththalmol. 11, 302–311
(1972).
26. Green, J. D. & Arduini, A. A. Hippocampal electrical activity and arousal. J.
Neurophysiol. 57, 533–557 (1954).
27. Csicsvari, J., Hirase, H., Czurko, A. & Buzsaki, G. Reliability and state
dependence of pyramidal cell-interneuron synapses in the hippocampus: an
ensemble approach in the behaving rat. Neuron 21, 179–189 (1998).
28. Kramis, R., Vanderwolf, C. H. & Bland, B. H. Two types of hippocampal
rhythmical slow activity in both the rabbit and the rat: relations to behavior
and effects of atropine, diethyl ether, urethane, and pentobarbital. Exp.
Neurol. 49, 58–85 (1975).
29. McCormick, D. A., Connors, B. W., Lighthall, J. W. & Prince, D. A
Comparative electrophysiology of pyramidal and sparsely spiny stellate
neurons of the neocortex. J. Neurophysiol. 54, 782–806 (1985).
30. Reid, R. C. & Alonso, J.-M. Specificity of monosynaptic connections from
thalamus to visual cortex. Nature 378, 281–284 (1995).
31. Swadlow, H. A. & Gusev, A. G. The influence of single VB thalamocortical
impulses on barrel columns of rabbit somatosensory cortex. J. Neurophysiol.
83, 2803–2813 (2000).
32. Reitboeck, H. J. Fiber microelectrodes for electrophysiological recordings.
J. Neurosci. Methods 8, 249–262 (1983).
33. Eckhorn, R. & Thomas, U. A new method for the insertion of multiple
microprobes into neural and muscular tissue, including fiber electrodes, fine
wires, needles and microsensors. J. Neurosci. Methods 49, 175–179 (1993).
34. Lu, S.-M., Guido, W. & Sherman, S. M. Effects of membrane voltage on
receptive field properties of lateral geniculate neurons in the cat:
contributions of the low threshold Ca2+ conductance. J. Neurophysiol. 68,
2185–2198 (1992).

nature neuroscience • volume 4 no 4 • april 2001

Copyright of Nature Neuroscience is the property of Nature Publishing Group and its content may not be copied
or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.

