RESEARCH ARTICLE

Subcellular Distribution of a1G Subunit of T-type
Calcium Channel in the Mouse Dorsal Lateral
Geniculate Nucleus
Laxmi Kumar Parajuli,1,2 Yugo Fukazawa,1,2,3* Masahiko Watanabe,4 and Ryuichi Shigemoto1,2,5
1

Division of Cerebral Structure, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, 444-8787, Japan
Department of Physiological Sciences, Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Okazaki 444-8787, Japan
3
CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo 102-0075, Japan
4
Department of Anatomy, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan
5
SORST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi 333-0012, Japan
2

ABSTRACT
T-type calcium channels play a pivotal role in regulating
neural membrane excitability in the nervous system.
However, the precise subcellular distributions of T-type
channel subunits and their implication for membrane
excitability are not well understood. Here we investigated the subcellular distribution of the a1G subunit of
the calcium channel which is expressed highly in the
mouse dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN). Light
microscopic analysis demonstrated that dLGN exhibits
intense immunoperoxidase reactivity for the a1G subunit. Electron microscopic observation showed that the
labeling was present in both the relay cells and interneurons and was found in the somatodendritic, but not
axonal, domains of these cells. Most of the immunogold
particles for the a1G subunit were either associated

with the plasma membrane or the intracellular membranes. Reconstruction analysis of serial electron microscopic images revealed that the intensity of the
intracellular labeling exhibited a gradient such that the
labeling density was higher in the proximal dendrite
and progressively decreased towards the distal dendrite. In contrast, the plasma membrane-associated particles were distributed with a uniform density over the
somatodendritic surface of dLGN cells. The labeling
density in the relay cell plasma membrane was about
3-fold higher than that of the interneurons. These
results provide ultrastructural evidence for cell-typespecific expression levels and for uniform expression
density of the a1G subunit over the plasma membrane
of dLGN cells. J. Comp. Neurol. 518:4362–4374, 2010.
C 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
V

INDEXING TERMS: Cav3.1; thalamus; electron microscopy; preembedding immunogold labeling; 3D reconstruction;
dendrite
The opening of voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCC)
leads to transient increases in intracellular Ca2þ. The
location of calcium influx is strictly regulated to control
the activation of calcium-dependent processes, such as
neurotransmitter release, neuronal excitation, and regulation of gene expression. Biophysical and pharmacological
studies have led to the identification of high-voltage-activated (HVA) calcium channels (L-, N-, P/Q-, and R-types)
and a low-voltage-activated (LVA) T-type calcium channel
(for reviews, see Jones, 1998; Catterall, 2000). Members
of the HVA calcium channels require a larger membrane
depolarization for their opening than the LVA T-type calcium channel. The latter is mostly inactivated at neuronal
resting potential; thus, a brief hyperpolarization is
required for the channel to deinactivate prior to activation
(Jahnsen and Llinas, 1984; Perez-Reyes, 2003). Among
C 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
V

4362

the three different genes encoding T-type VGCC a1 subunits (Cav3.1/a1G, Cav3.2/a1H, and Cav3.3/a1I), the
a1G subunit is highly expressed in the thalamus (Talley
et al., 1999). It has been shown to play a prominent role
in the generation of low-threshold spikes leading to

Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of
this article.
Grant sponsors: SORST and CREST; Japan Science and Technology
Agency (JST) (to R.S. and Y.F., respectively); Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research on Priority Areas-Molecular Brain Sciences from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (MEXT);
Grant numbers: 20019031 (to R.S.), 18022043 (to Y.F.).
*CORRESPONDENCE TO: Yugo Fukazawa, Division of Cerebral
Structure, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki 444-8787,
Japan. E-mail: yugo@nips.ac.jp
Received December 7, 2009; Revised April 20, 2010; Accepted July 1,
2010
DOI 10.1002/cne.22461
Published online July 26, 2010 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.
com)

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

518:4362–4374 (2010)

Localization of Cav3.1 in dLGN

TABLE 1.
Primary Antibodies
Code # in original
lab or supplier

Host animal
and clonality

Developer
or supplier

Epitope amino
acid residues

a1G subunit of T-type
Ca2þ channel

N/A

Guinea pig polyclonal
affinity purified

Dr. Masahiko
Watanabe

Glutamic acid
decarboxylase (GAD)

MAB351

Mouse monoclonal
(affinity purified IgG)

Chemicon

Amino acid residues
2269-2283 of the mouse
Cav3.1 gene (CAI25956)
Purified rat brain GAD
(Chang and Gottlieb, 1988)

Target molecule

Optimal dilution
1 lg/mL
1 lg/mL

N/A, not applicable.

thalamic burst firing and slow-wave sleep oscillations
(Steriade et al., 1988; Huguenard, 1996; Kim et al., 2001;
Lee et al., 2004; Song et al., 2004; Anderson et al., 2005).
Neuronal excitability is thought to be dependent on the
precise spatial distribution of voltage-gated ion channels.
In the thalamus, although previous studies have suggested postsynaptic expression (dendrites and soma) of
the a1G channel subunit, their relative distribution along
the somatodendritic axis of the thalamic neurons has not
yet been fully elucidated and is a matter of debate. An
earlier electrophysiological and computational modeling
study suggested an enrichment of this subunit in the distal part of the dendrite (Destexhe et al., 1998), whereas
others have suggested its predominant somatic and proximal dendritic localization (Munsch et al., 1997; Zhou
et al., 1997; Williams and Stuart, 2000; Zhuravleva et al.,
2001; Rhodes and Llinas, 2005). In a recent computational modeling study, it was suggested that the appropriate thalamic oscillation can be achieved even if the
T-type calcium channels are distributed uniformly throughout the somatodendritic arbor (Zomorrodi et al., 2008).
Although informative, the data obtained from these previous studies remain largely speculative due to the lack of a
selective T-type calcium channel blocker and unequivocal
criteria to define the T-type current. Furthermore, these
studies are technically constrained due to the seemingly
challenging limitation of resolving the calcium signals from
the fine-caliber distal dendrites. Therefore, a precise and
quantitative subcellular localization of this channel has
been the subject of considerable interest.
Immunoelectron microscopy is an indispensable
method for studying the ultrastructural localization of
channel molecules. However, to date our potential understanding of the a1G distribution has been hampered by
the lack of specific antibodies against this subunit applicable for immunoelectron microscopy. In this study, to reveal
the relative distribution of the a1G subunit in the somatodendritic axis of the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus
(dLGN) neurons, we used a newly developed antibody specific for the mouse a1G subunit and employed high-resolution immunoelectron microscopy. Our results demonstrate

a uniform distribution of the a1G subunit over the somatodendritic plasma membrane of the dLGN neurons.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Ten 8-week-old male wildtype (WT) mice (C57BL/6NCr
Slc) and four 8-week-old a1G-deficient mice (Kim et al.,
2001) were used for this study. The animals were raised
in a normal light/dark cycle with free access to food and
water. Efforts were made to minimize the number of animals and pain and suffering of the animals used. All
experimental procedures performed on the animals were
carried out in accordance with the guidelines of animal
care and use committee of the National Institute for Physiological Sciences (Okazaki, Japan) and approved by the
committee.

Fixation
For light microscopic observation, mice were deeply
anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (intraperitoneal
[i.p.], 50 mg/kg body weight) and perfused with 25 mM
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 1 minute followed by a
fixative containing 4% paraformaldehyde and 15% saturated
picric acid in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB, pH 7.4). For electron microscopic observation, anesthetized mice were fixed
with the same fixative solution containing 0.1% glutaraldehyde (Polysciences, Warrington, PA). After fixation the brain
was cut coronally on a slicer (Leica, VT-1000, Austria) at a
thickness of 50 lm for both light and electron microscopic
analysis. The sections were washed twice in PB and then
further processed for immunolabeling.

Antibody characterization
Primary antibodies used in this study are listed in Table
1. A guinea pig polyclonal antibody for the a1G subunit of
the T-type calcium channel was raised against the C-terminal sequence of mouse Cav3.1. The specificity of this
anti-a1G antibody has been previously tested and confirmed by immunohistochemistry in light microscopy (Hildebrand et al., 2009). The previous study demonstrated
that the intense immunofluorescent signal observed in

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

4363

Parajuli et al.

the cerebellum and thalamus of the WT mouse was
absent in the brain sections from a1G knockout (KO)
mouse. In the present study we further confirmed the
specificity of the antibody. At both the light microscopic and
electron microscopic levels, the strong labeling observed in
the thalamus of the WT mouse was abolished in the a1G
KO mice (Fig. 1; Supporting Figs. 1, 2), thereby providing
evidence for the specificity of our immunolabeling. A mouse
monoclonal antibody for glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD;
Chemicon, Temecula, CA; MAB351) used in this study has
been shown to recognize the lower molecular weight isoform (65 kDa) of the two GAD isoforms identified in the
brain (Chang and Gottlieb, 1988).

Immunohistochemistry for light microscopy
Fixation, labeling conditions, and antibody concentration were rigorously optimized during our initial pilot
experiments. Sections were blocked with 10% normal
goat serum (NGS; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA)
and 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 1 hour and then incubated overnight at 4 C with the primary antibody against
a1G (1 lg/mL) in PBS containing 2% NGS and 0.05%
Triton X-100. After several washes in PBS, sections were
incubated with a biotinylated goat anti-guinea pig IgG
antibody (1:200; Vector Laboratories) diluted in PBS containing 2% NGS and 0.05% Triton X-100 at room temperature for 1 hour. The sections were washed with PBS and
reacted with avidin-biotin peroxidase complex (1:100
ABC-Elite; Vector Laboratories) diluted in PBS containing
0.1% Triton X-100 for 1 hour at room temperature. After
washing three times in PBS the sections were washed
once in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.6) and then incubated at room temperature in the buffer supplemented
with 0.025% 3,30 -diamino benzedine tetrahydrochloride
(DAB; Dojindo Lab., Kumamoto, Japan) and 0.003% hydrogen peroxide. Upon reaching the appropriate signal intensity, the DAB reaction was terminated by incubation in
PB. Sections were mounted on glass slides, dehydrated in
graded alcohol, and covered with coverslips. Digital
images were obtained with a BX50 microscope equipped
with a DP70 digital camera (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The
images for WT and the KO sections were taken under the
same conditions (e.g., light intensity, exposure time) and
adjusted for brightness and contrast identically and uniformly in Photoshop CS2 (Adobe, San Jose, CA) for preparation of figures.

Electron microscopic immunoperoxidase
labeling
Sections were cryoprotected in a solution containing
25% sucrose and 10% glycerol in 20 mM PB and freezethawed with liquid nitrogen. After several washes in 50

4364

mM Tris-HCl buffered saline (TBS), the sections were
incubated with the blocking solution containing 20% NGS
in TBS for 1 hour and then processed similarly as
described for light microscopic immunohistochemistry
except that Triton X-100 was omitted in all the steps.
After the development of immunoperoxidase reaction,
sections were fixed with 1% OsO4 for 40 minutes, stained
with 1% uranyl acetate for 35 minutes, dehydrated, and
flat-embedded in Durcupan resin (ACM Fluka, SigmaAldrich, Gillingham, Dorset, UK). Ultrathin sections of 70
nm thickness were prepared using an ultramicrotome
(Ultracut T; Leica), poststained briefly with lead citrate,
and observed under a transmission electron microscope
(EM208S; Philips, Eindhoven, The Netherlands). Digital
images were obtained using a MegaView III CCD camera
(Olympus-SIS, Germany) and processed with iTEM software (Olympus-SIS) for image analysis. For preparation of
figures, brightness and contrast of images were adjusted
uniformly over the entire image with Photoshop CS2.
Three-dimensional reconstructions of neuronal profiles
were carried out with serial ultrathin sections using a
freeware, Reconstruct, provided through the Synapse
Web (Fiala, 2005).

Electron microscopic immunogold labeling
Sections were freeze-thawed as described above. After
several washes in TBS, the sections were blocked with 5%
acetylated bovine serum albumin (BSA-C; Aurion, Wageningen, The Netherlands) and 5% NGS in PBS for 1 hour.
The sections were then washed twice with PBS containing
0.2% BSA-C (PBS/BSA-C) and incubated overnight at 4 C
with the a1G antibody diluted at 1 lg/mL in PBS/BSA-C.
After washing with PBS/BSA-C, sections were incubated
overnight at 4 C with 0.8-nm gold conjugated goat antiguinea pig secondary antibody (1:100; Aurion) diluted in
PBS/BSA-C. After several washes with PBS-BSA/C, the
sections were further washed four times for 10 minutes
each with enhancement conditioning solution (ECS;
Aurion). The sections were then silver-intensified with
the R-Gent SE-EM intensification kit (Aurion). After
washing, the sections were fixed with 1% OsO4, stained
with uranyl acetate, dehydrated, and flat-embedded in
Durcupan resin.
Double immunolabeling was performed using the
guinea pig polyclonal antibody against a1G and the
mouse monoclonal antibody against GAD. Sections were
incubated in a mixture of the anti-a1G (1 lg/mL) and
anti-GAD (1 lg/mL) antibodies. After overnight incubation with biotinylated anti-mouse (1:100; Vector Laboratories) and gold-conjugated goat anti-guinea pig secondary antibodies (1:100; Aurion), we proceeded first with
the immunogold method for a1G up to the silver

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Localization of Cav3.1 in dLGN

enhancement and then with ABC method followed by a
peroxidase reaction for GAD.

Quantification of immunoparticles
Among various nuclei of the thalamus, this study particularly focused on the dLGN because its neural circuitry
has been well characterized and the electrophysiological
properties of neuronal cells in this nucleus has been
extensively studied. In addition, the dLGN in rodents is
the only thalamic nucleus containing both principal neurons and local circuit interneurons (Ohara et al., 1983;
Paxinos, 1995; Arcelli et al., 1997), thus conferring the
unique possibility of comparing the a1G expressions
between these two different neuronal cell types.
The subcellular distribution of a1G was analyzed from
two WT mice for single labeling and one WT mouse for
double labeling. In order to sample the profiles within the
optimal penetration depth of the antibody, electron
micrographs were obtained within 1–3 lm from the
resin–tissue interface. To ascertain that a specific dendrite is immunolabeled, we examined the dendrites in
20–30 serial ultrathin sections collected on the same grid
for quantification purposes.
In the single-labeling experiment, the relay cells were
distinguished from the interneurons based on their morphological criteria. Any dendritic profiles containing flattened and pleomorphic synaptic vesicles were identified
as interneuron processes. Somatic profiles were identified as interneurons if they have a small somatic diameter
with nuclear infoldings (Jones, 2007). When encountered,
such processes were omitted from the quantification
study performed from the single-labeling experiment,
which focused only on the relay cell processes. However,
it should be noted that our electron microscopic immunolabeling study makes use of a mild tissue fixation condition which hinders the optimal ultrastructural preservation. Thus, to investigate labeling in interneurons, GAD
immunoreactivity was used as a marker for reliable distinction of interneurons from the relay cells in another
separate set of experiments.
The retinogeniculate axon terminal was distinguished
from the corticogeniculate axon terminal based on their
morphological features. Large terminals containing round
synaptic vesicles and pale mitochondria were identified
as retinogeniculate terminals, whereas small terminals
containing round synaptic vesicles and dark mitochondria
were identified as corticogeniculate terminals (Lieberman
and Webster, 1974).
Twenty-eight different dendritic segments and three
different somatic segments were reconstructed from 20–
25 serial ultrathin sections. The dendritic diameter of individual reconstructed profiles was measured as the widest
transect of the narrowest dimension of the ovoid profile

of the dendrite (Hanson and Smith, 2002). A dendritic diameter is an indirect measure of the distance from the
soma, since the minor diameter of a dendrite progressively decreases with increasing distance from the soma.
Linear density of the gold particles in the plasma membrane was obtained by dividing the total number of
plasma membrane-bound immunogold particles (see text
for the criteria) by plasma membrane length of individual
reconstructed dendrites. Dendritic surface area was calculated by multiplying the total plasma membrane length
of each reconstructed dendrite by the section thickness
(70 nm). The total number of plasma membrane-bound
gold particles found in a reconstructed dendrite was divided by the dendritic surface area to obtain the labeling
density of plasma membrane-bound particles in individual
profiles. For calculating the density of internal membrane-bound particles, the total number of intracellular
particles found in a profile was divided by the dendritic
cross-sectional area.
Synaptic, perisynaptic, and extrasynaptic areas were
´
defined according to the method described by Bartho
et al. (2004). Briefly, the synaptic area was calculated
from synaptic lengths in a series of EM images and the
section thickness (70 nm) as shown in the formula below.
Asyn ¼½ðlfirst þ lsecond Þ þ ðlsecond þ lthird Þ
þ Á Á Á þ ðllastÀ1 þ llast Þ Â 0:07=2
where lfirst, lsecond, lthird, . . .llast refer to the synaptic length
of the first, second, third, . . . last section of the series
containing the given synapse. Perisynaptic plasma membrane area, defined as an annulus surrounding a synapse
by 200 nm in this study, was determined by an approximation of the area occupied by two rectangles on the top
and bottom of the synapse, two parallelograms on the
sides of the synapse, and four quarters of a cycle connecting the rectangles and the parallelograms. It can be
formulated as:
Aperisyn ¼ ðlfirst Â 0:2Þ þ ðllast Â 0:2Þ
þ ½0:2 Â 0:07 Â ðn À 1Þ Â 2 þ ð0:22 Â 3:14Þ
where n refers to the number of sections containing that
synapse. Extrasynaptic areas were obtained after subtracting the synaptic and perisynaptic areas from the
total surface area of the reconstructed dendrites. In
order to compare labeling densities for a1G between
perisynaptic and extrasynaptic areas, only dendrites in
which synapses located within at least three sections
(%210 nm) inside from the top and bottom edge of the
reconstructed dendrite were used. Out of 28 reconstructed dendrites, this analysis criterion was fulfilled by
six dendrites. A total of nine synapses were found in

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

4365

Parajuli et al.

these six dendrites. Membrane-bound particles for a1G
were divided into two groups as perisynaptic particles
and extrasynaptic particles, and the labeling densities
within the two membrane domains in individual profiles
were calculated.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS (Chicago, IL). Shapiro-Wilk’s W-test was applied for checking
the normality of the datasets. The statistical significance
between groups was analyzed by the two-tailed unpaired
Student’s t-test and Mann–Whitney U-test for parametric
and nonparametric analysis, respectively. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for statistical comparison among multiple groups. Correlation analysis was performed using Spearman’s rank order test. Statistical
significance was defined as P < 0.05. The data in the text
are expressed as mean 6 SEM.

RESULTS
Distribution of immunoreactivity
for a1G in the thalamus

At the light microscopic level, immunolabeling for a1G
revealed a specific pattern of a1G distribution in the thalamic nuclei. A majority of the thalamic nuclei exhibited a
moderate to strong labeling for a1G (Fig. 1 and Supporting Fig. 1). A strong immunoreactivity was observed in
the midline thalamic nuclei (e.g., paraventricular thalamic
nucleus and reuniens nucleus), anterior thalamic nuclei
(e.g., laterodorsal thalamic nucleus), medial thalamic
nuclei (e.g., mediodorsal thalamic nucleus), and ventral
motor nuclei (e.g., ventral lateral, ventral medial). Intrala-

minar nuclei such as the parafasicular nucleus had a
moderate level of a1G immunoreactivity. In the epithalamus, the lateral habenular nucleus showed a strong immunoreactivity, whereas the immunosignal in the medial
habenular nucleus was weak. In the geniculate complex,
dLGN and the magnocellular part of ventral LGN showed
strong reactivity compared to the very weak immunoreactivity observed in the parvocellular part of ventral LGN.
The ventrobasal nucleus, one of the major thalamic relay
nuclei, also showed a strong immunoreactivity for a1G.
The dLGN, which is the visual first-order relay nucleus,
had a stronger immunoreactivity than its corresponding
higher-order counterpart nuclei, that is, the lateral posterior nucleus. In contrast to the dLGN, the labeling in the
thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN), which contains no relay
cells, was below the detection limit (Supporting Fig. 1).
No immunoreactivity for a1G was detected in the white
matter. The a1G labeling observed in the WT mice was
completely abolished in the KO animals (Fig. 1, Supporting Figs. 1, 2).

Electron microscopic observation of a1G
immunoreactivity in the dLGN
The immunoperoxidase reaction was performed to
determine the distribution of a1G immunoreactivity at the
subcellular level. The peroxidase reaction endproduct
was observed exclusively in dendrites and somata but not
in axons and presynaptic terminals (Fig. 2A). Qualitatively, a large number of dendrites were positive for a1G.
Peroxidase labeling revealed that the dendrites postsynaptic to putative retinal as well as cortical terminals
were both immunopositive.
Next, to reveal the precise location of the channels at a
greater spatial resolution, immunogold labeling was performed. Immunogold particles for a1G were observed in
small- and large-caliber dendrites as well as in the somata
in close correspondence with the peroxidase labeling (Fig.
2B,C). The gold particles were localized intracellularly as
well as in close proximity to the plasma membrane. Virtually no immunoparticles for a1G were observed in the slices obtained from the KO animal (Supporting Fig. 2).

Distribution of a1G immunogold particles in
relation to membrane structures
Figure 1. a1G immunoreactivity in the mouse thalamus. Light microscopic immunoperoxidase staining for a1G in the coronal brain
slice showed intense immunoreactivity in several thalamic nuclei
in the WT mouse but not in the a1G KO mouse. APT, anterior pretectal nucleus; dLGN, dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus; LP, lateral
posterior thalamic nucleus; PF, parafascicular nucleus; VB, Ventrobasal nucleus; vLGN, ventral lateral geniculate nucleus. Scale
bar ¼ 250 lm.

4366

To analyze the location of immunogold particles relative to the nearest membrane structures, the distance
from the center of the individual gold particles to the middle of the nearest membrane structures were measured
in one WT specimen. The measured distance for each
gold particle was subjected to histogram analysis with a
bin width of 5 nm and plotted against the frequency of
profiles (Fig. 3). Although the distance distribution of the

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Localization of Cav3.1 in dLGN

gold particles did not follow a Gaussian distribution (P <
0.001, n ¼ 179), the data plot revealed a single peak at
10–15 nm (mean ¼ 16.6 6 0.82 nm, median ¼ 14.6 nm),
thereby suggesting that those immunoparticles are bound
to molecules expressed in the membranes.

Relative proportion of the plasma
membrane- and intracellular membranebound a1G immunogold particles in the
dendritic domains of the dLGN relay
neurons
To quantify the proportion of a1G present in the
plasma versus intracellular membranes, we recategorized
all the immunoparticles either as plasma membrane- or
internal membrane-bound. Based on the particle distribution histogram presented in Figure 3, about 95% of the
immunoparticles were located within 42 nm (mean þ
2 SD) from the membrane structures. Thus, particles
located within 42 nm from the plasma membrane towards
the cell interior were categorized as plasma membranebound particles and the rest of them as intracellular
membrane-bound particles (Fig. 4). From a total of 1,284
immunogold particles analyzed, 118 particles were
observed in the small-caliber (<0.5 lm) distal dendrites
(n ¼ 9), of which 98 (83%) were plasma membrane-bound
and 20 (17%) were internal membrane-bound. Of 143 particles observed in the medium-caliber (0.5–1.0 lm) dendrites (n ¼ 7), 94 (65.7%) were plasma membrane-bound
and 49 (34.3%) were internal membrane-bound. In the
large-caliber (>1.0 lm) proximal dendrites (n ¼ 12),
1,023 particles were observed, of which 400 (39.1%)
were plasma membrane-bound and 623 (60.9%) were internal membrane-bound. In total, 592 (46.1%) particles
were found to be associated with the plasma membrane
and the remaining 692 (53.9%) particles were associated
with the internal membrane.

Densities of a1G immunogold particles over
somatodendritic compartments of dLGN
relay neurons
In recent years, a number of studies have shown that
certain ion channel molecules can be selectively targeted
to specific membrane compartments. In dLGN, previous
electrophysiological studies have suggested an uneven
distribution of T-type calcium channels between the

Figure 2. Immunoreactivity for a1G was found exclusively in
postsynaptic elements in the dLGN. Immunoperoxidase staining
and immunogold labeling for a1G in the mouse dLGN were investigated by electron microscopy. The peroxidase reaction endproduct was observed exclusively in the dendrites but not in the
presynaptic compartments (A). Electron micrographs showing the
localization of the immunogold particles in the dendritic regions
(B) and soma (C) demonstrate that the immunoparticles were
found not only in close proximity to the plasma membrane
(arrows) but also deep in the cytoplasm (arrowheads). a, presynaptic axons; c, cytoplasm; d, dendrite; n, nucleus. Scale bars ¼
500 nm in A; 800 nm in B; 1.5 lm in C.

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

4367

Parajuli et al.

Figure 3. Immunogold particles for a1G were associated with
membrane structures. Location of immunoparticles for a1G was
measured in relation to the nearest membrane structures. The
values were allocated to 5-nm-wide bins and expressed as count.
The frequency distribution of the particles (n ¼ 179) plotted
against their distance from the nearest membrane structure
showed a single peak lying at 10–15 nm (mean ¼ 16.6 nm and
median ¼ 14.6 nm). Approximately 95% of the immunoparticles
were within 42 nm from the membranes, suggesting that the particles were bound to epitopes present in the cellular membranes.

somata and the dendrites (Munsch et al., 1997; Zhou
et al., 1997; Destexhe et al., 1998; Williams and Stuart,
2000; Zhuravleva et al., 2001; Rhodes et al., 2005). We
therefore aimed to determine if indeed a1G shows such
compartmental distribution in the somatodendritic
domains of dLGN cells. In serial sections, the immunogold
particles for a1G were observed both in the small- and
large-caliber dendrites (Fig. 5A–H). No correlation
between the dendritic diameter and the immunogold linear density was detected (Fig. 6A, r ¼ À0.209, P ¼
0.286, n ¼ 28). Similarly, there was no significant difference in the immunogold density between the somatic
(0.194 6 0.004 particle/lm, n ¼ 3) and dendritic (0.182
6 0.012 particle/lm, n ¼ 28) compartments (P ¼ 0.640,
Mann–Whitney U-test). Mean linear density values correspond to 2.77 particle/lm2 (2.71–2.88) and 2.60 particle/lm2 (range 1.01–4.71) in the somatic and dendritic
compartments, respectively. It is also important to mention that there was a high variability in the labeling density even among the dendrites of similar dendritic diameters (Fig. 6A). Similar proximodistal distribution and
labeling patterns were obtained from another WT animal
in which 30 dendritic segments and six somatic segments
were reconstructed from 28–30 serial ultrathin sections
collected on a single grid (data not shown).
Since a large fraction of immunoparticles were found
to be associated with the intracellular membranes, we

4368

Figure 4. Proportion of plasma membrane-bound immunoparticles for a1G. Bar graphs showing relative proportions of the
plasma membrane-bound particles which were estimated in 28
reconstructed dendrites and analyzed in relation to the diameter
of individual profiles. A total of 1,284 immunoparticles were analyzed. Note that the large-caliber dendrites showed a higher proportion of internal labeling (see text). In total, 46.1% of the
particles were plasma membrane-bound, whereas the rest of the
particles (53.9%) were located intracellularly.

quantified and compared the intracellular labeling density
with that of the plasma membrane labeling. When the
proportion of intracellular membrane-bound immunogold
particles was examined in relation to the dendritic diameter, a weak positive correlation was observed (for related
information, see Fig. 4, r ¼ 0.909, P < 0.001, n ¼ 28).
Moreover, the density of intracellular membrane-bound
particles also increased with dendritic diameter (Fig. 6B,
r ¼ 0.559, P ¼ 0.002, n ¼ 28). This suggests that the
higher intracellular labeling in the proximal part is not
merely due to the larger volume of the profile but due to
the specific localization of these molecules to the intracellular membranes.

No accumulation of immunogold for a1G
nearby synaptic junctions
At the electron microscopic level, it has been shown
that the a1A and a1G subunits of calcium channels were
localized mainly in the dendritic spines in the cerebellum,
suggesting the role of these channels in synaptic events
(Kulik et al., 2004; Hildebrand et al., 2009). In the present
study, even though in some cases the gold particles for
a1G were observed near the synapse, no clear preference
of the gold particles for the synaptic, perisynaptic, or extrasynaptic sites could be established in the serially reconstructed dendrites (Fig. 5I–L). Rather, the immunoparticles

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Localization of Cav3.1 in dLGN

Figure 5. Three-dimensional reconstruction of labeled dendrites. Consecutive serial pictures show a1G immunogold labeling in the smallcaliber dendrite (A–D) and in the large-caliber dendrite (E–H). Four dendrites with membrane-bound particles reconstructed from 28 serial
electron micrographs are shown (I–L). Asymmetrical synapses (excitatory) are represented by red and symmetrical synapses (inhibitory)
are represented by green. Particles in black represent particles facing towards the observer and particles in pink represent those on the
opposite face of the dendritic arbor. The faint green synapse in K is located on the opposite face of the arbor. Note that the immunoparticles (total 132 particles) were distributed randomly over the dendritic plasma membrane without any noticeable preference to the synaptic sites. d, dendritic diameter; D, labeling density (particle/lm2). Scale bars ¼ 200 nm in A–D; 500 nm in E–H,I–L.

were found to be diffusely scattered all over the dendritic
plasma membranes.
This qualitative observation was further supported by
the results obtained from the quantitative analysis of the
immunogold density in relation to the perisynaptic (an
annulus surrounding a synapse by 200 nm) and extrasynaptic areas. The average immunogold densities were
3.34 6 0.96 (range 0.00–7.25, n ¼ 9) particles/lm2 and
3.13 6 0.26 (range 1.76–3.89, n ¼ 6) particles/lm2 in
the perisynaptic and extrasynaptic areas, respectively,
and were not significantly different (P ¼ 0.841, unpaired
Student’s t-test).

a1G labeling in interneurons
Despite the wealth of data about the expression of Ttype calcium channels in principal neurons, little is known
about their expression in interneurons. With this incentive, double labeling for GAD and a1G was performed to
analyze a1G distribution in the GABAergic interneuron.
Figure 7 shows two consecutive serial sections with a
GAD-positive interneuron dendrite (i) and a relay cell dendrite (r) located adjacent to each other. The relay cell

dendrite was well labeled in comparison to the interneuron dendrite. Serial reconstruction analysis (10–15
sections) revealed a linear density of 0.063 6 0.015 particle/lm in the dendritic (n ¼ 19) and 0.026 6 0.022
particle/lm in the somatic compartments (n ¼ 3) of the
interneuron, with no significant difference (P ¼ 0.356,
Mann–Whitney U-test). GAD negative dendritic profiles
representing an obvious relay cell population had a linear
density of 0.206 6 0.021 in the dendritic (n ¼ 22) and
0.244 6 0.037 particle/lm in the somatic (n ¼ 3) compartments. These density values for the relay cell were not
significantly different from those obtained from the singlelabeling experiment. The quantitative analysis revealed
3.3-fold higher labeling density in the plasma membrane of
the relay cell dendrite when compared to the interneuron
dendrite (P < 0.001, Mann–Whitney U-test). Moreover,
this difference was as high as 9.4-fold in the case of labeling densities between the somatic compartments of these
two cell populations (P < 0.001, Mann–Whitney U-test).
This suggests that despite the presence of a1G channels
in interneurons, they were expressed at much lower levels
when compared to those in the relay cells.

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

4369

Parajuli et al.

observations further corroborate the uniform proximodistal distribution of a1G channels in the plasma membrane
of dLGN cells.

DISCUSSION

Figure 6. a1G immunoparticles were observed uniformly over the
somatodendritic domains of the plasma membrane. A: Density of
immunogold particles for a1G associated with the plasma membrane was measured in serial section electron micrographs (n ¼
28 for dendrites; n ¼ 3 for somata) and plotted against the diameter of individual profiles. The filled dots represent the labeling
densities of individual relay cell dendrites, and the open rectangle
represents the average labeling density in the relay cell soma. No
correlation was observed between the dendritic diameter and the
immunogold density (r ¼ À0.209, P ¼ 0.286). Note that there
was a large variability in the immunogold density even among the
dendrites with similar dendritic diameters, and the variability was
more pronounced in the small-caliber dendrites compared to the
larger-caliber proximal dendrites. B: Number of internal membranebound immunogold particles for a1G was divided by the crosssectional area of individual profiles and plotted against the diameter
of the profile. The intracellular labeling density for a1G was highest
at the proximal dendrites and decreased gradually towards the
small-caliber dendrites. A positive correlation was found between
the density of the a1G particles and the dendritic diameter (r ¼
0.559, P ¼ 0.002, n ¼ 28 for dendrites; n ¼ 3 for somata).

We also examined whether the interneurons showed
any preference in a1G expression in relation to the dendritic diameter. The average linear densities of immunogold particles associated with interneuron dendrites of
different diameters were 0.054 6 0.048 particle/lm,
0.064 6 0.034 particle/lm, and 0.086 6 0.034 particle/lm in the small-caliber (<0.5 lm), medium-caliber
(0.5–1.0 lm), and large-caliber (>1.0 lm) dendrites,
respectively (Fig. 8). There were no significant differences
in the relative abundance of the labeling among these
compartments (one-way ANOVA, F2,16 ¼ 0.260, P ¼
0.775). Again, the plasma membrane of the relay cells
showed a uniform labeling density among different dendritic compartments in this double-labeling experiment
(one-way ANOVA, F2,19 ¼ 0.016, P ¼ 0.984). These

4370

The spontaneous rhythmic activities of thalamic relay
cells crucially depend on the T-type calcium channel and
most importantly on the a1G subunit. The a1G KO mouse
shows a complete loss of relay cell burst response (Kim
et al., 2001), suggesting that this isoform of T-type calcium channel is essential for the bursting activity of the
thalamic relay neurons. Using a highly specific antibody
against a1G, our study has revealed the quantitative distribution of the a1G subunit in various parts of the dendritic arbor in the mouse dLGN neurons. The results suggest
that a1G molecules are distributed with a uniform density
over the somatodendritic plasma membrane compartments of the mouse dLGN cells.

Regional distribution of a1G in the thalamus

In this study, we found immunoreactivity for the a1G
subunit in the majority of the thalamic nuclei but not in
the reticular thalamic nucleus in mice. The regional distribution of a1G immunoreactivity in the thalamus is in
agreement with previously reported in situ hybridization
studies (Zhang et al., 2002; the Allen Brain Atlas, Lein
et al., 2007; Ernst et al., 2009) and an electrophysiological study (Chemin et al., 2002) which suggested the
predominant expression of a1G in relay cells. However,
our study differs from that of McKay et al. (2006) and
Kova´cs et al. (2009), in which strong immunostaining in
the TRN of rats and cats, respectively, was observed. In
these studies, no tests in KO mice for the specificity of
their antibodies were performed. While the difference in
the species used might have been a cause for such a
discrepancy in the immunoreactivity observed in the
TRN, our data can be easily reconciled with the previous
in situ hybridization study, which had no detectable
expression of a1G in the rat TRN (Talley et al., 1999). It
would be of future interest to examine the possible
interspecies differences regarding the a1G localization
in the TRN.
The presence of low-threshold calcium currents (LTCC)
with fast kinetics in the rat TRN cells has been reported
(Joksovic et al., 2005). In the study, the definitive subunit
responsible for the LTCC was not identified due to the
fact that both a1G and a1H subunits of the T-type calcium channel exhibit fast kinetics (Klo
¨ckner et al., 1999)
and specific blockers against the individual subunits of
the channels are not fully established.
Taken together, our data suggest that a1G is
expressed in the majority of thalamic nuclei including

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Localization of Cav3.1 in dLGN

Figure 7. GABAergic interneurons showed weaker immunoreactivity for a1G than putative relay cells in the dLGN. The expression of a1G
in GABAergic interneurons was investigated by double immunoelectron microscopy for a1G and GAD. GAD immunoreactivity was visualized
by a peroxidase reaction and that for a1G was visualized by immunogold particles. Consecutive images (A and B) show a relay cell dendrite (r) and an interneuron dendrite (i) located adjacent to each other. Scale bar ¼ 500 nm.

Uniform distribution of a1G over
somatodendritic plasma membrane of dLGN
neurons and possible functional significance

Figure 8. a1G expression level in interneurons was lower than
that in relay cells in the dLGN. Bar graphs showing the average
densities of the plasma membrane-bound immunogold particles for
a1G in the dendrites, classified into three groups according to their
diameter (<0.5 lm, 0.5–1 lm, >1 lm), and somata of the relay
cells (open bar; n ¼ 22 and 3 for dendrite and soma, respectively)
and GABAergic interneurons (closed bar; n ¼ 19 and 3 for dendrite
and soma, respectively). The labeling densities in the interneurons
were similar over different dendritic compartments (ANOVA, P ¼
0.775) and significantly lower than those in the relay cell (P <
0.001, Mann–Whitney U-test). In corroboration with the observation
made from the single labeling experiment, no somatodendritic gradient of a1G immunogold particle was observed in the plasma
membrane of the relay cells. Note that the relatively large magnitude of error bars (SEM) associated with each of the compartments
suggests a considerable variability of the immunogold labeling density among the profiles with similar dendritic diameters.

dLGN but not in the TRN and that a1H rather than a1G
may be the key component of LTCC showing fast kinetics
in the TRN, at least in mice.

The dendrites of principal relay neurons receive the glutamatergic afferents in a compartmentalized manner, with the
sensory input generally contacting the proximal part of the
relay cell dendrite and the cortical input preferentially contacting the distal part (Murphy and Sillito, 1987; Robson,
1993; Sherman and Guillery, 1998). Thalamic reticular axons
make contacts throughout the dendritic arbor (Liu et al.,
1995). In line with these morphological observations, the
uniform distribution of a1G throughout the dendritic plasma
membrane might suggest an efficient means of achieving
rebound bursting during slow-wave sleep. That is, the
GABA release from TRN axons can effectively de-inactivate
dendritically localized T-type calcium channels and enables
their activation with incoming glutamatergic signals (Contreras et al., 1993; Zhan et al., 2000). Thus, the expression
of a1G in both the proximal and distal dendritic locations
would imply the involvement of this subunit in the amplification of both the sensory input and the cortical input,
thereby promoting the oscillatory activity of the relay cells.
Our study revealed that the density of the plasma membrane particles is uniform throughout the somatodendritic
compartments of the dLGN relay neuron (Figs. 6A, 8). However, the ratios of surface area against volume change
along the somatodendritic compartments; the soma has
the smallest and the distal dendrite has the largest ratio.
Taking this into consideration, the different ratios are likely
to result in a proportionally larger effect of T-type calcium
channels in the distal dendrite compared to the proximal
dendrite. It has been suggested that the EPSP generated in
the distal part will be attenuated on the way to the soma

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

4371

Parajuli et al.

(Bloomfield et al., 1987). Therefore, placing a larger number
of calcium channels in the distal dendrite might be one of
the ways to counteract the cable filtering effect.
Another line of evidence suggesting a higher density of
T-type calcium channels in the proximal dendrites and
soma stems from the dendritic cell attached patch recording (Williams and Stuart, 2000). Due to the technical difficulty in patching from very fine distal dendrites, these
authors limited their study to within the proximal 60 lm
length of the dendritic arbor. In view of the fact that the
thalamic dendrites can extend as far as roughly 200 lm
(Ohara and Havton, 1994), this study in effect investigated
the channel distribution within a short dendritic segment.
Destexhe et al. (1998) performed an electrophysiological
study of the T-type calcium channel density in the dendrites
and soma of the ventrobasal neuron, another major thalamic relay neuron. The authors inferred a higher density of
T-current in the distal dendrites than in the soma. They
recorded the T-type current from dissociated cells, which
lack most of the dendritic processes, and intact cells in slices and revealed T-type-mediated conductances of 8–14
pS/lm2 in the dendrites and 4.5–7.6 times smaller values
in the soma. By using computational studies, they suggested that T-type calcium channel density must be 5 times
higher in the distal dendrite than in the soma to reproduce
the current traces obtained from the intact thalamocortical
cells recorded in slices. Assuming the single channel conductance of T-type channel as 7.5 pS (Perez-Reyes et al.,
1998), the recorded conductance densities would be equivalent to 1.07–1.87 channels/lm2 in the dendrites and 4.5–
7.6 times smaller in the soma. Surprisingly, our preembedding immunogold labeling revealed an average labeling density of 2.60 particles/lm2 for a1G in the relay cell dendrites. It is obvious that the channel density suggested by
our immunogold labeling study is very likely to be underrepresented because the sensitivity of the method is
unlikely to be 100%. However, the density value obtained
here was even higher than that estimated in the recording
experiment by Destexhe et al. Therefore, it is possible that
this electrophysiological study is underestimating the actual
numbers of T-channels in situ. This underestimation may
compromise the computational conclusion leading to the
higher density of T-channels in the distal dendrites.
Even though some studies have argued for a nonuniform distribution of T-channels, a recent computational
study by Zomorrodi et al. (2008) suggested that the thalamic oscillations can be generated under uniform somatodendritic distribution of T-channels. Our experimental data
together with their computational study raise the possibility that the nonuniform distribution of the T-type calcium
channel is not a prerequisite for thalamic bursting.
In contrast to the uniform expression density of the
plasma membrane a1G immunoparticles, the density of the

4372

intracellular membrane particles was highest in the soma
and the proximal part of the dendrite and gradually
decreased distally (Fig. 6B). The large amount of intracellular labeling observed in our experiment probably represents
the newly synthesized a1G translocating from the site of
synthesis to the plasma membrane. Some other cytoplasmic labeling may also represent the channels undergoing
internalization and sequestration from the site of action.
Moreover, our quantitative analysis showed a large variability in the labeling density of the membrane-bound
a1G even within the dendrites of similar diameters (Fig.
6A). This is consistent with the results of dendritic patch
attached recordings in the dLGN, where the amplitude of
the T-type calcium current was greatly variable in dendrites located at the same distance from the soma (Williams and Stuart, 2000). In the thalamic paraventricular
nucleus, the calcium imaging experiments also revealed
variability in the magnitude of the calcium transients
among different dendrites (Richter et al., 2006).

a1G expression in the dLGN interneurons
Due to the very small magnitude of rebound burst
observed in interneurons, earlier studies suggested the
lack of T-type calcium channels in these cells (McCormick
and Pape, 1988). In later studies, it was shown that interneurons can generate burst firing in response to the
injected current (Pape and McCormick, 1995; Munsch
et al., 1997; Zhu et al., 1999; Broicher et al., 2007). The
lack of burst firing in the interneurons in the earlier study
was later reconciled to be due to the presence of A-type potassium current, which has an antagonistic effect in terms
of net membrane current, thereby preventing the generation of low-threshold spikes (Pape et al., 1994). Here in our
immunohistochemical study, we provide ultrastructural evidence for the presence of a1G in dLGN interneurons.
It is worth mentioning that some interneuron dendrites
were not labeled throughout the serial section observed.
The inclusion of these nonlabeled profiles resulted in the
large error bars shown in Figure 8. It is conceivable that
these immunonegative profiles express a1G at a low level;
however, our method may have been insensitive to detect
the minute amount of a1G. The fact that we did not observe
immunolabeling in some of the interneurons might also suggest that there is a heterogeneous population of interneurons in the dLGN, and a1G may be expressed by an interneuronal subpopulation. There is indeed anatomical
evidence indicating the presence of at least two populations
of interneurons in the dLGN (Gabbott and Bacon, 1994).

Technical considerations of our study
In contrast to our study that focused on 8-week-old
adult mice, the electrophysiological studies were performed in young animals (postnatal days [P]12–16),

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Localization of Cav3.1 in dLGN

where the visual system is not fully mature and is still in
the developmental stage. In view of the fact that the
somatodendritic T-type calcium transients may vary during development (Pirchio et al., 1990; Yunker et al.,
2003), the subcellular redistribution of a1G in adult mice
compared to the postnatal age mice cannot be excluded.
Comparing the present results with electrophysiological
data obtained from the age-matched tissues would be informative and helpful in understanding the mechanisms
underlying bursting activity in the dLGN neurons.
In our study, we could only assess the relative distance
of individual dendritic profiles from the soma by measuring the dendritic cross-sectional diameter, and this
method is less accurate than the direct measurement of
the distances under a light microscope. Moreover, our
analysis was performed by sampling profiles randomly
from multiple cells in the area investigated, and a smallscale gradient, if any, of the channel localization might
have been masked by variability of a1G expression levels
among dLGN neurons.
It is also plausible that the quantification of the channel
proteins detected by the immunogold method may not
necessarily correlate with the expression density of the
functional channel. It has been suggested that calcium
channels may either be in a phosphorylated or nonphosphorylated state (for review, see Catterall, 2000) and the
phosphorylation of a1G molecules potentiates T-type calcium current amplitude in the thalamocortical neurons
(Leresche et al., 2004; Park et al., 2006). Thus, even if
the channels are distributed uniformly in situ, the electrophysiological responsiveness of these channels might differ at various neuronal compartments depending on their
phosphorylation states (Zomorrodi et al., 2008).
Our study did not reveal any obvious preference of a1G
molecules for the synaptic sites. However, in the preembedding method most of the antibodies fail to detect target antigens located at the postsynaptic sites (for review,
see Masugi-Tokita and Shigemoto, 2007). Therefore, our
observation that immunogold particles for a1G were not
present within the postsynaptic densities may need to be
interpreted with caution.
In conclusion, the present results revealed that the a1G
subunit of T-type calcium channels are uniformly distributed in the somatodendritic plasma membrane compartments of dLGN neurons. Further studies on the relative
spatial localization of a1G to other ionic channels important for thalamic bursting might substantiate our current
understanding of rhythmic activities of thalamic neurons.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Drs. M. Kano and K. Sakimura for providing
a1G-deficient mice. We thank Dr. K. Matsui for valuable
discussions during the initial phase of article preparation.

LITERATURE CITED
Anderson MP, Mochizuki T, Xie J, Fischler W, Manger JP, Talley
EM, Scammell TE, Tonegawa S. 2005. Thalamic Cav3.1
T-type Ca2þ channel plays a crucial role in stabilizing
sleep. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:1743–1748.
Arcelli P, Frassoni C, Regondi MC, Biasi SD, Spreafico R.
1997. GABAergic Neurons in mammalian thalamus: a
marker of thalamic complexity. Brain Res Bull 42:27–37.
Bartho´ P, Payne JA, Freund TF, Acsa´dy L. 2004. Differential
distribution of the KCl cotransporter KCC2 in thalamic
relay and reticular nuclei. Eur J Neurosci 20:965–975.
Bloomfield SA, Hamos JE, Sherman SM. 1987. Passive cable properties and morphological correlates of neurones in the lateral
geniculate nucleus of the cat. J Physiol (Lond) 383:653–692.
Broicher T, Kanyshkova T, Landgraf P, Rankovic V, Meuth P,
Meuth SG, Pape HC, Budde T. 2007. Specific expression
of low-voltage-activated calcium channel isoforms and
splice variants in thalamic local circuit interneurons. Mol
Cell Neurosci 36:132–145.
Catterall WA. 2000. Structure and regulation of voltage-gated
Ca2þ channels. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 16:521–555.
Chang YC, Gottlieb DI. 1988. Characterization of the proteins
purified with monoclonal antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase. J Neurosci 8:2123–2130.
Chemin J, Monteil A, Perez-Reyes E, Bourinet E, Nargeot J,
Lory P. 2002. Specific contribution of human T-type calcium channel isotypes (a1G, a1H and a1I) to neuronal
excitability. J Physiol 540:3–14.
Contreras D, Curro Dossi R, Steriade M. 1993. Electrophysiological properties of cat reticular thalamic neurones in
vivo. J Physiol (Lond) 470:273–294.
Destexhe A, Neubig M, Ulrich D, Huguenard J. 1998. Dendritic
low-threshold calcium currents in thalamic relay cells.
J Neurosci 18:3574–3588.
Ernst WL, Zhang Y, Yoo JW, Ernst SJ, Noebels JL. 2009. Genetic
enhancement of thalamocortical network activity by elevating a1G mediated low-voltage-activated calcium current
induces pure absence epilepsy. J Neurosci 29:1615–1625.
Fiala JC. 2005. Reconstruct: a free editor for serial section microscopy. J Microsc 218:52–61.
Gabbott PLA, Bacon SJ. 1994. Two type of interneurons in the
dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the rat: a combined
NADPH diaphorase histochemical and GABA-immunocytochemical study. J Comp Neurol 350:281–301.
Hanson JE, Smith Y. 2002. Subcellular distribution of high-voltage-activated calcium channel subtypes in rat globus pallidus neurons. J Comp Neurol 442:89–98.
Hildebrand ME, Isope P, Miyazaki T, Nakaya T, Garcia E, Feltz A,
Schneider T, Hescheler J, Kano M, Sakimura K, Watanabe M,
Dieudonne S, Snutch TP. 2009. Functional coupling between
mGluR1 and Cav3.1 T-type calcium channels contributes to
parallel fibre-induced fast calcium signaling within purkinje
cell dendritic spines. J Neurosci 31:9668–9682.
Huguenard JR. 1996. Low-threshold calcium currents in central
nervous system neurons. Annu Rev Physiol 58:329–348.
Jahnsen H, Llina´s R. 1984. Electrophysiological properties of
guinea-pig thalamic neurones: an in vitro study. J Physiol
349:205–226.
Joksovic PM, Bayliss DA, Todorovic SM. 2005. Different kinetic properties of two T-type Ca2þ currents of rat reticular thalamic neurones and their modulation by enflurane.
J Physiol 566:125–142.
Jones SW. 1998. Overview of voltage dependent calcium
channels. J Bioenerg Biomemb 30:299–312.
Jones EG. 2007. The thalamus, 2nd ed. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Kim D, Song I, Keum S, Lee T, Jeong MJ, Kim SS, McEnery
MW, Shin HS. 2001. Lack of burst firing of thalamocortical

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

4373

Parajuli et al.

relay neurons and resistance to absence seizures in mice
lacking a1G T-type calcium channels. Neuron 31:35–45.
Klo¨ckner U, Lee JH, Cribbs LL, Daud A, Hescheler J, Pereverzev
A, Perez-Reyes E, and Schneider T. 1999. Comparison of the
Ca2þ currents induced by expression of three cloned a1
subunits, a1G, a1H and a 1I, of low-voltage-activated T-type
Ca2þ channels. Eur J Neurosci 11:4171–4178.
Kova´cs K, Sı´k A, Ricketts C, Timofeev I. 2009. Subcellular distribution of low-voltage activated T-type Ca2þ channel subunits (Cav3.1 and Cav3.3) in reticular thalamic neurons of
the cat. J Neurosci Res 88:448–460.
Kulik A, Nakadate K, Hagiwara A, Fukazawa Y, Lujan R, Saito
H, Suzuki N, Futatsugi A, Mikoshiba K, Frotscher M, Shigemoto R. 2004. Immunocytochemical localization of the
a1A subunit of the P/Q-type calcium channel in the rat
cerebellum. Eur J Neurosci 19:2169–2178.
Lee J, Kim D, Shin HS. 2004. Lack of delta waves and sleep
disturbances during non-rapid eye movement sleep in mice
lacking a1G-subunit of T-type calcium channels. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 101:18195–18199.
Lein ES, Hawrylycz MJ, Ao N, et al. 2007. Genome-wide atlas
of gene expression in the adult mouse brain. Nature 445:
168–176.
Leresche N, Hering J. Lambert RC. 2004. Paradoxical potentiation of neuronal T-type Ca2þ current by ATP at resting
membrane potential. J Neurosci 24:5592–5602.
Lieberman AR, Webster KE. 1974. Aspects of the synaptic organization of intrinsic neurons in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. An ultrastructural study of the normal and of
the experimentally deafferented nucleus in the rat. J Neurocytol 3:677–710.
Liu XB, Honda CN, Jones EG. 1995. Distribution of four types
of synapse on physiologically identified relay neurons in
the ventral posterior thalamic nucleus of the cat. J Comp
Neurol 352:69–91.
Masugi-Tokita M, Shigemoto R. 2007. High-resolution quantitative visualization of glutamate and GABA receptors at
central synapses. Curr Opin Neurobiol 17:387–393.
McCormick DA, Pape HC. 1988. Acetylcholine inhibits identified interneurons in the cat lateral geniculate nucleus.
Nature 334:246–248.
McKay BE, McRory JE, Molineux ML, Hamid J, Snutch TP, Zamponi GW, Turner RW. 2006. Ca(V)3 T-type calcium channel
isoforms differentially distribute to somatic and dendritic
compartments in rat central neurons. Eur J Neurosci. 24:
2581–2594.
Munsch T, Budde T, Pape HC. 1997. Voltage activated intracellular calcium transients in thalamic relay cells and interneurons. Neuroreport 8:2411–2418.
Murphy PC, Sillito AM. 1987. Corticofugal feedback influences
the generation of length turning in the visual pathway.
Nature 329:727–729.
Ohara PT, Havton LA. 1994. Dendritic architecture of rat
somatosensory thalamocortical projection neurons. J Comp
Neurol 341:159–171.
Ohara PT, Lieberman AR, Hunt SP, Wu JY. 1983. Neural elements containing glutamic acid decarboxylase in the dorsal
lateral geniculate nucleus of the rat; immunohistochemical
studies by light and electron microcopy. Neuroscience 8:
189–211.
Pape HC, McCormick DA. 1995. Electrophysiological and pharmacological properties of interneurons in the cat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. Neuroscience 68:1105–1125.
Pape HC, Budde T, Mager R, Kisvarday ZF. 1994. Prevention
of Ca2þ-mediated action potentials in GABAergic local circuit neurones of rat thalamus by a transient Kþ current.
J Physiol (Lond) 478:403–422.

4374

Park JY, Kang HW, Moon HJ, Huh SU, Jeong SW, Soldatov NM,
Lee JH. 2006. Activation of protein kinase C augments Ttype Ca2þ channel activity without changing channel surface density. J Physiol (Lond) 577:513–523.
Paxinos G. 1995. The rat nervous system, 2nd ed. Sydney:
Academic Press.
Perez-Reyes E. 2003. Molecular physiology of low-voltage-activated T-type calcium channels. Physiol Rev 83:117–161.
Perez-Reyes E, Cribbs LL, Daud A, Lacerda AE, Barclay J, Williamson MP, Fox M, Rees M, Lee J-H. 1998. Molecular
characterization of a neuronal low-voltage-activated T-type
calcium channel. Nature 391:896–900.
Pirchio M, Lightowler S, Crunelli V. 1990. Postnatal development of the T calcium current in cat thalamocortical cells.
Neuroscience 38:39–45.
Rhodes PA, Llinas R. 2005. A model of thalamocortical relay
cells. J Physiol (Lond) 565:765–781.
Richter TA, Kolaj M, Renaud LP. 2006. Heterogeneity in low
voltage-activated Ca2þ channel-evoked Ca2þ responses
within neurons of the thalamic paraventricular nucleus. Eur
J Neurosci 24:1316–1324.
Robson JA. 1993. Qualitative and quantitative analysis of the
patterns of retinal input to neurons in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. J Comp Neurol 334:324–336.
Sherman SM, Guillery RW. 1998. On the actions that one nerve
cell can have on another: distinguishing ‘‘drivers’’ from ‘‘modulators.’’ Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95:7121–7126.
Song I, Kim D, Choi S, Sun M, Kim Y, Shin HS. 2004. Role of
the a1G T-type calcium channel in spontaneous absence
seizures in mutant mice. J Neurosci 24:5249–5257.
Steriade M, Llinas RR. 1988. The functional state of the thalamus and the associated neuronal interplay. Physiol Rev
68:649–742.
Talley EM, Cribbs LL, Lee J, Daud A, Perez-Reyes E, Bayliss
DA. 1999. Differential distribution of three members of a
gene family encoding low voltage-activated (T-type) calcium channels. J Neurosci 19:1895–1911.
Williams SR, Stuart GJ. 2000. Action potential backpropagation and somato-dendritic distribution of ion channels in
thalamocortical neurons. J Neurosci 20:1307–1317.
Yunker AMR, Sharp AH, Sundarrad S, Ranganathan V, Copeland TD, McEnery MW. 2003. Immunological characterization of T-type voltage dependent calcium channel Cav3.1
(alpha1G) and Cav3.3 (alpha1I) isoforms reveal differences
in their localization, expression and neural development.
Neuroscience 117:321–335.
Zhan XJ, Cox CL, Sherman SM. 2000. Dendritic depolarization
efficiently attenuates Low-threshold calcium spikes in thalamic relay cells. J Neurosci 20:3909–3914.
Zhang Y, Mori M, Burgess DL, Noebels JL. 2002. Mutations in
high-voltage-activated calcium channel genes stimulate
low-voltage-activated currents in mouse thalamic relay
neurons. J Neurosci 22:6362–6371.
Zhou Q, Godwin DW, O’Malley DM, Adams PR. 1997. Visualization of calcium influx through channels that shape the
burst and tonic firing modes of thalamic relay cells. J Neurophysiol 77:2816–2825.
Zhu JJ, Lytton WW, Xue JT, Uhlrich DJ. 1999. An intrinsic oscillation in interneurons of the rat lateral geniculate nucleus.
J Neurophysiol 81:702–711.
Zhuravleva SO, Kostyuk PG, Shuba YM. 2001. Subtypes of
low voltage-activated Ca2þ channels in laterodorsal thalamic neurons: possible localization and physiological roles.
Eur J Physiol 441:832–839.
Zomorrodi R, Kro
¨ger H, Timofeev I. 2008. Modeling thalamocortical cell: impact of Ca2þ channel distribution and cell
geometry on firing pattern. Front Comput Neurosci 2:5.

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

