Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w. e l s ev i e r. c o m / l o c a t e / y m c n e

Correlation of T-channel coding gene expression, IT, and the low threshold Ca2+ spike
in the thalamus of a rat model of absence epilepsy
Tilman Broicher, Tatyana Kanyshkova, Patrick Meuth, Hans-Christian Pape, Thomas Budde ⁎
Institut für Physiologie I, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Robert-Koch-Str. 27a, D-48149 Münster, Germany

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 22 April 2008
Revised 27 June 2008
Accepted 16 July 2008
Available online 29 July 2008
Keywords:
Patch clamp
T-type Ca2+ channel
Absence epilepsy
Thalamus
Burst ﬁring
Real-time PCR

a b s t r a c t
T-type Ca2+ current-dependent burst ﬁring of thalamic neurons is thought to be involved in the hypersynchronous activity observed during absence seizures. Here we investigate the correlation between the
expression of T-channel coding genes (α1G, -H, -I), T-type Ca2+ current, and the T-current-dependent low
threshold Ca2+ spike in three functionally distinct thalamic nuclei (lateral geniculate nucleus; centrolateral
nucleus; reticular nucleus) in a rat model of absence epilepsy, the WAG/Rij rats, and a non-epileptic control
strain, the ACI rats. The lateral geniculate nucleus and centrolateral nucleus were found to primarily express
α1G and α1I, while the reticular thalamic nucleus expressed α1H and α1I. Expression was higher in WAG/Rij
when compared to ACI. The T-type Ca2+ current properties matched the predictions derived from the
expression pattern analysis. Current density was larger in all nuclei of WAG/Rij rats when compared to ACI
and correlated with LTS size and the minimum LTS generating slope, while T-type Ca2+ current voltage
dependency correlated with the LTS onset potential.
© 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
The thalamocortical system displays low frequency oscillatory
activity during slow wave sleep as well as spike and wave discharges
(SWD) observed during episodes of absence epilepsy (Avoli et al.,
2001; Crunelli and Leresche, 2002; Steriade, 1997). The neural
substrates of these slow oscillations are the thalamus and the cortex.
Based on efferent projections, the thalamus can be divided into three
groups of nuclei: (1) the speciﬁc nuclei, which project to well
circumscribed cortical regions (e.g. lateral geniculate nucleus, LGN);
(2) the non-speciﬁc nuclei, which project to broader, primarily frontal
cortical regions and the striatum (e.g. centrolateral nucleus of the
intralaminar nuclei, CL); (3) the reticular thalamic nucleus (NRT),
which projects onto thalamocortical relay nuclei in an inhibitory
manner, serving as a pacemaker.
Within the thalamus, the slow oscillations are accompanied by
burst ﬁring in thalamocortical relay (TC) as well as reticular neurons
(Paz et al., 2007; Pinault et al., 1998; Seidenbecher and Pape, 2001;
Seidenbecher et al., 1998; Slaght et al., 2002; Williams, 1953). Burst
ﬁring in thalamic neurons depends on the action of T-type Ca2+
channels. These channels generate a low threshold Ca2+ spike (LTS),
which triggers a high frequency burst of action potentials (Huguenard,
1996). Until now, three genes (CACNA1G, -H, -I) coding for three Ttype Ca2+ channel isoforms, termed α1G, α1H, and α1I, have been

⁎ Corresponding author. Fax: +49 251 83 55551.
E-mail address: tbudde@uni-muenster.de (T. Budde).
1044-7431/$ – see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.mcn.2008.07.012

identiﬁed (Perez-Reyes, 2003). All isoforms seem to be subjected to
alternative splicing, thus vastly increasing the number of physiologically distinct channel types (Perez-Reyes, 2006). Currents generated
by the α1G and α1H isoforms appear rather similar in heterologous
expression systems, while currents generated by the α1I isoform
differ in voltage dependency and kinetics (Chemin et al., 2002).
Previous studies have shown that neurons of different thalamic
nuclei (speciﬁc relay nuclei vs. reticular nucleus) display different Ttype Ca2+ currents (IT) and different LTS properties (Huguenard, 1996).
In line with these ﬁndings, expression of T-channel isoforms has been
found to vary between thalamic nuclei: relay nuclei primarily express
the α1G isoform, while α1H and α1I expression has been observed in
the NRT (Talley et al., 1999).
Several lines of evidence link thalamic IT to slow oscillations of the
thalamocortical system. Genetic rat models of absence epilepsy reveal
an increased IT and an increased expression of T-channel coding genes
in the NRT (Talley et al., 2000; Tsakiridou et al., 1995). Knock-out
mouse models have demonstrated the dependence of slow sleep
oscillations as well as spike and wave discharges on the presence of
the α1G isoform in the thalamus (Anderson et al., 2005; Kim et al.,
2001; Song et al., 2004). Furthermore, anti-epileptic medications
effective in human patients have been shown to suppress thalamic Ttype Ca2+ currents (Broicher et al., 2007b; Coulter et al., 1989a,b;
Leresche et al., 1998).
This study was designed to investigate the correlation between the
expression of T-type Ca2+ channel coding genes, IT, and the LTS in
thalamic neurons. To include neuronal populations known to display
differences in these parameters, neurons from LGN and NRT were

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

investigated. To extend the experiments to a neuronal population of
largely unknown function and cellular properties, but a potential role
in spreading epileptic activity throughout the thalamocortical system,
CL neurons of the non-speciﬁc intralaminar nuclei have been included
in the study. To scrutinize the effects of differences in the expression of
T-type Ca2+ channel coding genes, IT, and the LTS with respect to
absence epilepsy all experiments have been performed in a genetic rat
model of absence epilepsy, the WAG/Rij rats, and a non-epileptic
control strain, the ACI rats (Coenen and Van Luijtelaar, 2003) by
combining quantitative RT-PCR, whole-cell patch clamping in brain
slices, and computer modeling.
Results
Expression pattern of CACNA1G, -H, -I transcripts in the LGN, CL, and
NRT of WAG/Rij and ACI rats
First, the expression proﬁle of the three T-type Ca2+ channel
coding genes was examined in the LGN, CL, and NRT of WAG/Rij and
ACI rats. Samples of tissue yielded through laser capturing were
subjected to quantitative RT-PCR procedures (Fig. 1A, note that lower

385

ΔCt values indicate higher mRNA expression). Distinct differences in
gene expression were found between nuclei and strains. In the LGN
and CL of both strains the CACNA1G isoform was strongly expressed,
while only a weak signal could be detected in the NRT. In both LGN
and CL, expression levels of the CACNA1G transcript were signiﬁcantly higher in WAG/Rij than in ACI rats (Fig. 1B, Table 1).
The CACNA1H isoform was usually below detection limits in the CL
and LGN, but was strongly expressed in the NRT of both strains and
expression levels tended to be higher in WAG/Rij, although this trend
failed to reach signiﬁcance (Fig. 1C, Table 1).
The CACNA1I transcript was found to be expressed in all three
nuclei of both strains. The expression levels were signiﬁcantly
different between strains and nuclei. The CL and NRT of WAG/Rij
rats expressed signiﬁcantly higher levels of CACNA1I mRNA than the
same nuclei of ACI rats. Within each strain, CACNA1I expression was
signiﬁcantly higher in the NRT than in the CL and LGN, while
expression in the CL was signiﬁcantly higher than in the LGN (Fig. 1D,
Table 1). A previous study by our group has demonstrated that the
expression of CACNA1I can be attributed to the local circuit
interneurons in the LGN. Thalamocortical projection neurons of the
LGN (LGN TC), which were subjected to electrophysiological

Fig. 1. Tissue level RT-PCR of CACNA1G, -H, and -I expression in the LGN, CL, and NRT of WAG/Rij and ACI rats. All 3 T-channel coding genes revealed an increased expression in WAG/Rij.
Note that lower ΔCt values indicate higher mRNA expression. (A) Examples of brain slices after laser microdissection of LGN (left panel), CL (right panel) and NRT (right panel) tissue. (B)
Mean cycle of threshold differences between CACNA1G and β2M mRNA in the LGN, CL, and NRT of WAG/Rij and ACI rats (upper panel). The increased CACNA1G expression in WAG/Rij
as compared to ACI is depicted in the lower panel. (C) Mean cycle of threshold differences between CACNA1H and β2-microglobuline (β2M) mRNA in the NRT of WAG/Rij and ACI rats
(upper panel). CACNA1H expression was usually below the detection limit in the CL and LGN of both strains. In the lower panel the increased CACNA1H expression in WAG/Rij as
compared to ACI is shown. (D) Mean differences of threshold circles from CACNA1I and β2M mRNA in the LGN, CL, and NRT of WAG/Rij and ACI rats (upper panel). The lower panel
depicts the increased CACNA1I expression in WAG/Rij as compared to ACI. ⁎p b 0.05; ⁎⁎p b 0.01; ⁎⁎⁎p b 0.001.

386

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

Electrophysiological properties of T-type Ca2+ currents in LGN, CL, and
NRT neurons of WAG/Rij and ACI rats

Table 1
Summary of RT-PCR data and statistical analysis
CACNA1G [ΔCt]

CACNA1H [ΔCt]

CACNA1I [ΔCt]

WAG/Rij LGN
CL
NRT

2.1 ± 0.1; n = 12
2.5 ± 0.1; n = 12
7.3 ± 0.3; n = 12

//
//
4.9 ± 0.2; n = 12

7.9 ± 0.2; n = 12
6.1 ± 0.2; n = 12
3.5 ± 0.2; n = 12

ACI LGN
CL
NRT

2.6 ± 0.1; n = 13
2.9 ± 0.1; n = 12
8.3 ± 0.8; n = 12

//
//
5.6 ± 0.3; n = 12

7.6 ± 0.3; n = 13
6.9 ± 0.2; n = 12
4.4 ± 0.3; n = 12

Statistical signiﬁcances CACNA1G
LGN vs. CL

LGN vs. NRT

CL vs. NRT

WAG/Rij
ACI

⁎
⁎

⁎
⁎

CL vs. CL
⁎

NRT vs. NRT
N.S.

Statistical signiﬁcances CACNA1H
LGN vs. CL

LGN vs. NRT

CL vs. NRT

WAG/Rij
ACI

//
//

//
//

CL vs. CL
//

NRT vs. NRT
N.S. (p = 0.058)

N.S.
N.S.

LGN vs. LGN
WAG/Rij vs. ACI
⁎
⁎p b 0.05; ⁎⁎p b 0.01; ⁎⁎⁎p b 0.001.

//
//

LGN vs. LGN
WAG/Rij vs. ACI
//
⁎p b 0.05; ⁎⁎p b 0.01; ⁎⁎⁎p b 0.001.
Statistical signiﬁcances CACNA1I
LGN vs. CL
WAG/Rij
ACI

⁎⁎⁎
⁎

LGN vs. LGN
WAG/Rij vs. ACI
N.S.
⁎p b 0.05; ⁎⁎p b 0.01; ⁎⁎⁎p b 0.001.

LGN vs. NRT

CL vs. NRT

⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎

⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎

CL vs. CL
⁎

NRT vs. NRT
⁎

N.S.: not signiﬁcant.

investigation in this study, solely express the CACNA1G gene (Broicher
et al., 2007a).
Next, the possibility of alternative splicing of the CACNA1G
transcript (exons 25/26) was investigated in the CL of both strains.
Alternatively spliced CACNA1G transcripts have been shown to give
rise to physiologically distinct channels (Chemin et al., 2001; Emerick
et al., 2006) and have been implicated in the generation of the
diverging T-type Ca2+ currents of LGN projection and local circuit
interneurons (Broicher et al., 2007a). Non-quantitative RT-PCR
experiments on CL tissue samples gathered through laser dissection
microscopy revealed the presence of two alternatively spliced
isoforms in the CL, data not shown. The smaller isoform will be
referred to as Iso1 (analogous to human α1G-a, AF027984), the larger
isoform will be referred to as Iso2 (analogous to human α1G-bc,
AF125161). In the majority of CL tissue samples from both strains
bands corresponding to both isoforms could be detected (WAG/Rij CL:
Iso1 only: 1 of 7 samples, Iso2 only: 0 of 7 samples; Iso1 and Iso2: 6 of
7 samples; ACI CL: Iso1 only: 2 of 8 samples, Iso2 only: 1 of 8 samples,
Iso1 and Iso2: 5 of 8 samples; data not shown).
Assuming that the differences on the mRNA level translate into
differences in channel protein, these results allow some predictions
concerning the properties of the T-type Ca2+ currents. The increased
expression of T-channel coding mRNA could lead to an increase in IT
density in WAG/Rij. According to data from heterologous expression
systems (Chemin et al., 2001, 2002; Emerick et al., 2006), NRT neurons
of both strains should display a T-type Ca2+ current voltage
dependency of comparatively positive values and slow kinetics,
while the IT of LGN TC neurons should display a rather negative IT
voltage dependency and fast kinetics. The IT of CL neurons should be
of intermediate voltage dependency and kinetics, when compared to
the IT recorded in LGN TC and NRT neurons.

To correlate IT of LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons of WAG/Rij and ACI
rats with the expression of the T-channel coding genes and the LTS,
the T-type Ca2+ current properties were investigated. Whole-cell
voltage clamp techniques were employed on neurons in brain slice
preparations. Between the stimulation protocols neurons were held at
−60 mV.
Voltage dependency of activation
The steady-state voltage dependency of activation was investigated by stepping neurons to increasingly positive test potentials
(200 ms, CL and LGN; 500 ms, NRT) from a conditioning potential of
−110 mV (700 ms, all nuclei; Fig. 2A). Construction of steady-state
activation curves revealed half maximal activation voltages (V h),
which were signiﬁcantly different between nuclei and strains (Fig. 2B).
In both strains, the T-type Ca2+ current of LGN TC neurons activated at
the most negative potentials, followed by neurons of the CL, where IT
activated at intermediate potentials, and neurons of the NRT, whose
T-type Ca2+ currents activated at the most positive voltages (Fig. 2B,
Table 2). The steady-state activation curves of the T-type Ca2+ currents
recorded in LGN and CL relay neurons of WAG/Rij rats revealed
signiﬁcantly more negative Vh values when compared to the
corresponding V h values obtained from recordings in neurons of ACI
rats. In the NRT the opposite situation was observed. Here, the V h
values of steady-state activation revealed a small but signiﬁcant shift
towards more positive potentials in WAG/Rij when compared to ACI
(Table 2).
Voltage dependency of inactivation
In the following, the steady-state inactivation was investigated by
holding neurons at increasingly positive potentials, starting from
−110 mV (700 ms, all nuclei), and stepping to a constant analyzing
potential of −55 mV (200 ms, CL and LGN; 500 ms, NRT; Fig. 2C). As
found for the steady-state activation, the half maximal voltages of
steady-state inactivation revealed signiﬁcant differences between
strains and nuclei (Fig. 2D). In WAG/Rij, the T-type Ca2+ currents
recorded in LGN TC neurons inactivated at the most negative
potentials, followed by T-type Ca2+ currents recorded in CL neurons,
and by T-type Ca2+ currents of NRT neurons, which inactivated at the
most positive potentials. In ACI, the inactivation voltage dependencies
of LGN TC and NRT neurons were similar, while CL neurons displayed
more positive voltage dependencies of inactivation (Table 2). A
comparison between strains proved the differences between the
steady-state inactivation V h of WAG/Rij and ACI CL and NRT to be
signiﬁcant. Within the WAG/Rij strain the differences between the
inactivation V h of all three nuclei were signiﬁcant, while in ACI rats
only the difference between CL and NRT was found to be signiﬁcant
ACI (Table 2).
Current density
As differences in T-type Ca2+ current density have been observed in
other models of absence epilepsy, the maximal amplitudes and T-type
Ca2+ current densities evoked by the activation type protocol have
been compared between nuclei and strains. Within both strains, CL
neurons displayed the highest T-type Ca2+ current amplitude,
followed by the LGN, and the NRT. All differences in T-type Ca2+
current amplitudes between nuclei were signiﬁcant within strains.
Between strains, differences were signiﬁcant for IT amplitudes of LGN
TC and CL neurons (Fig. 3A; Table 2). To obtain a measure of channel
density per unit area of cell membrane, the T-type Ca2+ current
amplitudes were divided by the capacitance of the neurons. Within
and between both strains, capacitances of relay neurons of the LGN
and CL were indistinguishable, while neurons of the NRT displayed
signiﬁcantly smaller capacitances than relay neurons of the LGN and

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

387

Fig. 2. Voltage dependency of activation and inactivation of T-type Ca2+ currents in LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons of WAG/Rij and ACI rats. (A) Representative families of IT of a LGN TC, a
CL, and a NRT neuron. Displayed recordings derive from neurons taken from ACI rats. Neurons were clamped to increasingly positive test potentials from a holding potential of
−110 mV. The initial test potential was − 90 mV, which was increased in steps of 3 mV. (B) Activation curves from LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons of WAG/Rij (upper panel) and ACI rats
(lower panel; symbols as indicated) were obtained by ﬁtting a Boltzmann equation to plots of mean values of normalized peak conductance vs. the test potential. Standard error bars
have been omitted for clarity; see Table 2 for statistical data. (C) Representative families of IT in LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons. Recordings derived from neurons of ACI rats are shown.
Neurons were stepped to a constant analyzing potential of −55 mV from increasingly positive conditioning potentials. Initial conditioning potential was − 110 mV, which was altered
in increments of 3 mV. (D) Inactivation curves from LGN, CL, and NRT neurons of WAG/Rij (upper panel) and ACI rats (lower panel; symbols as indicated) were obtained by ﬁtting a
Boltzmann equation to plots of mean values of normalized peak conductance vs. the test potential. Standard error bars have been omitted for clarity; see Table 2 for statistical data.

CL (Table 2). Within both strains NRT neurons displayed the largest Ttype Ca2+ current densities, followed by neurons of the CL and the LGN
(Fig. 3B, Table 2). Within both strains, the T-type Ca2+ current densities
of LGN TC neurons were signiﬁcantly smaller than the T-type Ca2+
current densities recorded in CL and NRT neurons, while the
differences between CL and NRT neurons were not signiﬁcant. All Ttype Ca2+ current densities were signiﬁcantly increased in WAG/Rij
compared to ACI (Fig. 3B, Table 2).

Activation and inactivation kinetics
Next, time-dependent activation and inactivation properties of the
T-type Ca2+ currents recorded in LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons were
analyzed. The inactivation of T-type Ca2+ currents was complete in all
nuclei of both strains. In WAG/Rij and ACI rats, the T-type Ca2+ current
recorded in LGN TC neurons was fastest to activate and inactivate,
followed by IT recorded in the CL, which displayed intermediate kinetics,
and the IT of NRT neurons, which was slowest to activate and inactivate.

388

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

Table 2
Summary of electrophysiological data and statistical analysis

IT Vh act [mV]
IT Vh inact [mV]
TTP at − 61 mV [ms]
TTP at − 37 mV [ms]
Inact τ at − 61 mV [ms]
Inact τ at − 37 mV [ms]
IT peak amp [pA]
Capacitance [pF]
CD [pA/pF]
V Rest [mV]
# LTS APs
LTS onset [mV]
LTS generating slope [mV/s]
Δ depolarization slopes
LTS generating slope TTX [mV/s]
Δ depolarization slopes TTX
LTS generating slope TTX/4-AP [mV/s]
Δ depolarization slopes TTX/4-AP

WAG/Rij LGN TC

WAG/Rij CL

WAG/Rij NRT

ACI LGN TC

ACI CL

ACI NRT

−66 ± 1.5; n = 19
− 86.1 ± 1; n = 18
22.8 ± 2; n = 19
13 ± 1; n = 19
28.9 ± 2; n = 19
23.5 ± 1; n = 19
−647 ± 37; n = 29
119 ± 4; n = 29
5.4 ± 0.2; n = 34
−72.6 ± 1; n = 29
2.4 ± 0.2; n = 25
−62.3 ± 1; n = 14
8.3 ± 0.5; n = 14
5.8 ± 0.5; n = 14
17.2 ± 4; n = 3
14.1 ± 4; n = 3
3.9 ± 0.4; n = 11
1.2 ± 0.3; n = 11

−62.3 ± 1; n = 24
−83.4 ± 0.8; n = 25
35.7 ± 2; n = 2
18 ± 2; n = 24
38.6 ± 2; n = 24
34.9 ± 2; n = 24
−941 ± 60; n = 25
133 ± 7; n = 25
7.2 ± 0.3; n = 25
−69.5 ± 1; n = 43
2.3 ± 0.2; n = 39
−63.8 ± 1; n = 19
4.8 ± 0.6; n = 18
2.5 ± 0.5; n = 18
6.4 ± 1; n = 3
2.9 ± 1; n = 3
4.0 ± 0.5; n = 9
1.8 ± 0.5; n = 9

−52 ± 0.5; n = 31
−81.6 ± 0.3; n = 30
97 ± 6; n = 31
35.8 ± 1; n = 31
137.7 ± 16; n = 31
55 ± 2; n = 31
−421 ± 28; n = 28
59 ± 4; n = 31
7.4 ± 0.4; n = 31
−75.6 ± 1; n = 21
9.9 ± 1.7; n = 21
−51.3 ± 2; n = 9
5.3 ± 0.5; n = 9
0.5 ± 0.3; n = 9
13.6 ± 2; n = 3
8.3 ± 1; n = 3
5.2 ± 0.2; n = 12
0.6 ± 0.2; n = 12

− 61.7 ± 1.4; n = 24
−83.1 ± 1.1; n = 21
22.1 ± 1; n = 24
15 ± 3; n = 24
29.9 ± 2; n = 24
26.8 ± 2; n = 24
− 509 ± 26; n = 34
110 ± 4; n = 34
4.7 ± 0.2; n = 34
−74.4 ± 1; n = 29
2.4 ± 0.2; n = 25
−65.8 ± 1; n = 13
11.5 ± 0.8; n = 13
9.7 ± 0.9; n = 13
20.9 ± 2; n = 3
17.4 ± 2; n = 3
5.6 ± 0.6; n = 9
3.8 ± 0.6; n = 9

−57.4 ± 1; n = 26
−80.8 ± 0.7; n = 24
37.8 ± 3; n = 27
16.1 ± 1; n = 27
44.6 ± 4; n = 27
30.4 ± 2; n = 27
−703 ± 53; n = 25
118 ± 7; n = 25
6.1 ± 0.3; n = 25
−70.7 ± 1; n = 35
1.8 ± 0.2; n = 26
−62.8 ± 1; n = 16
5 ± 0.6; n = 16
2.6 ± 0.6; n = 16
10.7 ± 3; n = 3
7.1 ± 3; n = 3
4.9 ± 0.9; n = 11
2.4 ± 0.8; n = 11

−54.4 ± 0.5; n = 40
−83.5 ± 0.3; n = 39
99.6 ± 5; n = 40
34.7 ± 1; n = 40
116.7 ± 7; n = 40
54.2 ± 2; n = 40
− 372 ± 24; n = 40
60 ± 3; n = 40
6.4 ± 0.3; n = 40
−74.3 ± 1; n = 40
10.4 ± 1.2; n = 39
−53.6 ± 2; n = 12
4.6 ± 0.4; n = 12
0.3 ± 0.2; n = 12
20.1 ± 4; n = 3
13.9 ± 4; n = 3
4.9 ± 0.5; n = 9
0.8 ± 0.4; n = 9

Statistical signiﬁcances within strains
IT Vh act
IT Vh inact
TTP
Inact τ
IT peak amp
Capacitance
CD
V Rest
# LTS APs
LTS onset
LTS generating slope
Δ depolarization slopes
⁎p b 0.05; ⁎⁎p b 0.01; ⁎⁎⁎p b 0.001.

WAG/Rij LGN vs. CL

WAG/Rij LGN vs. NRT

WAG/Rij NRT vs. CL

ACI LGN vs. CL

ACI LGN vs. NRT

ACI NRT vs. CL

⁎
⁎
⁎ to ⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎ to ⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
N.S.
⁎⁎⁎
⁎
N.S.
N.S.
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎

⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
N.S.
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎

⁎⁎⁎
⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
N.S.
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
N.S.
⁎⁎

⁎
N.S.
⁎ to ⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎ to ⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
N.S.
⁎⁎⁎
⁎
N.S.
⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎

⁎⁎⁎
N.S.
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
N.S.
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎

⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
N.S.
⁎
⁎⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
N.S.
⁎⁎

Statistical signiﬁcances between strains
IT Vh act
IT Vh inact
TTP
Inact τ
IT peak amp
Capacitance
CD
VRest
# LTS APs
LTS onset
LTS generating slope
Δ depolarization slopes
⁎p b 0.05; ⁎⁎p b 0.01; ⁎⁎⁎p b 0.001.

LGN
⁎
N.S.
N.S.
N.S.
⁎⁎
N.S.
⁎
N.S.
N.S.
⁎
⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎

Differences in current kinetics were minor between strains, but were
found to be signiﬁcant between nuclei. The time to maximum current
amplitude was used as a measure of activation kinetics (Figs. 3C, D),
while the time constants of inactivation were obtained by ﬁtting the
current traces with a mono-exponential function (Figs. 3E, F; Table 2).
In summary the predictions of the T-type Ca2+ current properties
derived from the expression analysis have been validated for the
differences in IT voltage dependency of activation and the IT kinetics
between nuclei. While the internucleus variations were expected, the
differences in voltage dependency between WAG/Rij and ACI were
unexpected and cannot be explained by the T-channel isoform
expression pattern or differential splicing of exons 25/26 investigated
in this study. Furthermore, the increased expression of T-channel
coding mRNA in WAG/Rij translated into increased IT densities.
Predicting the inﬂuence of different IT characteristics on the LTS
After having established the expression pattern of the pore
forming T-type Ca2+ channel α1 subunits and the electrophysiological

CL
⁎⁎
⁎
N.S.
N.S.
⁎⁎
N.S.
⁎
N.S.
N.S.
N.S.
N.S.
N.S.

NRT
⁎⁎
⁎⁎⁎
N.S:
N.S.
N.S.
N.S.
⁎
N.S.
N.S.
N.S.
N.S.
N.S.

properties of T-type Ca2+ currents in LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons of
WAG/Rij and ACI rats, we focused our attention on the functional
correlate of IT , the LTS. There are a number of LTS parameters which
could be directly determined by certain T-type Ca2+ current properties.
Intuition predicts the LTS onset potential to correlate with the voltage
dependency of IT activation, while the number of LTS associated action
potentials and the stimulation intensity required to generate a LTS
should depend on the T-type Ca2+ current density.
To test the validity of these assumptions, a single compartment
model based on the mathematical descriptions of IT , INa HH, IK HH, INaP ,
IL, IA, IKCa, as well as a sodium and a potassium leak current was used
(Broicher et al., 2007a). Two types of protocols were used to stimulate
the model neuron in the current-clamp regime. To assess the inﬂuence
of different IT parameters on the number of LTS associated action
potentials, a step depolarization protocol was used. The model cell
was hyperpolarized to −100 mV for 800 ms, before being stepped to
−70 mV, whereupon a LTS was generated. The inﬂuence of changes of
IT on the LTS onset potential and the stimulation intensity required to
elicit a LTS was investigated using a current ramp protocol. Here, the

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

389

Fig. 3. T-type Ca2+ current density and current kinetics of LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons of WAG/Rij and ACI rats. (A) Representative peak T-type Ca2+ currents of a LGN TC, a CL, and
a NRT neuron. Displayed recordings derive from neurons taken from ACI rats. (B) IT density of WAG/Rij and ACI LGN, CL, and NRT neurons. See text for statistical data. ⁎p b 0.05.
(C) Mean values of the time to peak amplitude of T-type Ca2+ currents of WAG/Rij LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons in relation to the activation protocol test potential (symbols as
indicated). Standard error bars have been omitted for clarity. (D) Mean values of the time to peak amplitude of T-type Ca2+ currents of ACI LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons in relation
to the activation protocol test potential (symbols as indicated). (E) Mean values of the time constant of inactivation of WAG/Rij LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons obtained by ﬁtting of
current traces with a mono-exponential function (symbols as indicated). (F) Mean values of the time constant of inactivation of ACI LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons obtained by
ﬁtting of current traces with a mono-exponential function (symbols as indicated). Standard error bars have been omitted for clarity.

model neuron was held at −100 mV before being depolarized by
current ramps of varying slopes. IT parameters including the T-type
Ca2+ current voltage dependency and current density were shifted by
±5 mV and ±30%, respectively.
Under control conditions (initial IT conﬁguration), the model
neuron generated 4 LTS associated action potentials in response to
current step stimulation (Fig. 4B). Increasing the T-type Ca2+ current
density by 30% led to an increase in the number of action potentials to
5 (Fig. 4C, upper panel), while decreasing the T-type Ca2+ current
density by 30% reduced the number of LTS associated action potentials
to 3 (Fig. 4C, lower panel). The number of LTS associated action
potentials was unaffected by hyperpolarizing the IT voltage dependency by 5 mV, while a 5 mV depolarizing shift reduced the number of
action potentials to 3 (Fig. 4A).
The LTS onset potential during current ramp stimulations was
estimated by a threshold based algorithm using the ﬁrst derivative of
the voltage trace (see Experimental methods). We began the
simulations using supra threshold stimuli and progressively decreased
the stimulus intensity. This initially leads to the disappearance of the
LTS associated action potentials followed by a gradual decline in LTS
amplitude with weaker stimuli (data not shown). The ﬁrst LTS without
any associated action potentials was used for quantiﬁcation. Under
control conditions the model cell's LTS onset potential was −75.4 mV.
Shifting the IT voltage dependency by 5 mV in the negative direction
resulted in a hyperpolarization of the LTS onset potential to −79.9 mV,
while shifting the IT voltage dependency by 5 mV in the positive
direction depolarized the LTS onset potential to −68.1 mV (Fig. 4D).
The effects of changes in IT density on the LTS onset potential were
comparatively minor (data not shown).
To investigate the effects of changes in IT parameters on the
stimulus intensity required for LTS generation, the depolarization
slopes were investigated. The depolarization slopes were obtained by
linearly ﬁtting the simulated voltage trace between the start of the

stimulation and the LTS onset point (as deﬁned above). Again, the
stimulation intensity was continuously decreased. The ﬁrst LTS
without any associated action potentials was used for quantiﬁcation.
Under control conditions, a depolarization slope of 42.6 mV/s
generated the ﬁrst LTS without associated action potentials. Shifting
the IT voltage dependency by 5 mV in the negative direction shifted
the depolarization slope to 38.9 mV/s. Depolarizing the IT voltage
dependency by 5 mV increased the depolarization slope to 52.5 mV/s
(data not shown). The effects of changes in IT density on depolarization slopes were more pronounced than the effects of changes in IT
voltage dependency. Increasing the T-type Ca2+ current density by 30%
reduced the depolarization slope to 28.1 mV/s. Decreasing IT density
by 30% increased the depolarization slope to 68.5 mV/s (Fig. 4E).
In summary, the LTS onset potential of the model neuron was
dependent on the IT voltage dependency, while the number of LTS
associated action potentials and the stimulation intensity were
dependent on the T-type Ca2+ current density. If the differences in Ttype Ca2+ current properties directly translate into differences of the
LTS onset potential in neurons of WAG/Rij and ACI rats recorded in the
LGN, CL, and NRT, the model predicts that: (1) LTS onset potentials of
LGN TC neurons should be negative to the LTS onset potentials of CL
neurons in both strains. (2) LTS onset potentials of NRT neurons
should be depolarized to the LTS onset potentials of LGN TC and CL
neurons in both strains. (3) LGN and CL neurons of WAG/Rij should
display LTS onset potentials negative to the LTS onset potentials of ACI
LGN and CL neurons. (4) The LTS onset potential of NRT neurons of
WAG/Rij and ACI rats should be approximately similar. Furthermore,
the model predicts that neurons of the NRT should generate the most
LTS associated action potentials, followed by neurons of the CL. LGN
neurons should generate the least amount of LTS associated action
potentials, due to the comparatively small IT density. Analogous,
neurons of WAG/Rij rats are predicted to generate more LTS associated
action potentials than ACI neurons. A similar pattern should be

390

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

Fig. 4. The inﬂuence of the Vh of IT activation as well as the T-type Ca2+ current density on the number of LTS associated action potentials of a model neuron is shown in A, B, and
C. A current step protocol was used to elicit the LTS. The modeled LTS under control conditions is shown in (B). The inﬂuences of changes in Vh are depicted in (A). The upper panel
displays the effect of a negative 5 mV shift of the IT Vh on the LTS. The inﬂuence of a shift of 5 mV in the positive direction is shown in the lower panel. In (C) the effects of
alterations of IT density on the LTS are depicted. The upper panel shows a LTS generated by a modeled neuron with 130% of the control T-current density. In the lower panel a LTS
generated in the presence of 70% of the control T-current density is displayed. In D and E the effects of alterations in IT voltage dependency and current density on the LTS onset
potential and the minimal LTS generating slope are displayed. Current ramp stimulations were used to elicit the LTS. The LTS onset potential was deﬁned using the derivatives of
the voltage traces (dV/dt) by a threshold based algorithm (see text). The simulations were started using above threshold depolarization slopes. Subsequently, the depolarization
slopes were decreased by a ﬁxed amount, until all LTS associated action potentials were lost. The ﬁrst trace without any LTS associated action potentials was used for quantiﬁcation
(see text). (D) Effect of changes of the IT voltage dependency on the LTS onset potential. LTS onset potentials are marked by black circles. A model with the initial IT conﬁguration
is shown in the middle (control). On the left side the effect of a 5 mV depolarization of the IT voltage dependency is shown, while the right side displays the effect of a 5 mV
hyperpolarization. (E) Effect of changes in IT density on the minimal LTS generating slope. A simulation using the initial IT conﬁguration is shown in the middle (100% IT). On the
left side, the effect of a reduction of the IT density by 30% is shown. On the right the inﬂuence of an increase of the IT density by 30% on the minimal LTS generating slope is
depicted.

observed for the minimal stimulation intensity leading to LTS
generation. NRT neurons should require the smallest depolarization
slopes leading to LTS generation, while CL and LGN neurons should
require stronger stimulation intensities.
Electrophysiological properties of LGN, CL, and NRT neurons of WAG/Rij
and ACI rats
To test the predictions made by the mathematical model we went
on to do whole-cell current-clamp recordings on neurons in brain slice
preparations. The resting membrane potentials of neurons recorded in
the same nucleus of WAG/Rij and ACI rats were similar. However,
signiﬁcant differences were found for the resting membrane potentials of neurons recorded in the different nuclei within both strains.
Neurons of the CL displayed signiﬁcantly more positive resting
membrane potentials when compared to neurons of the LGN and
the NRT, while resting membrane potentials of LGN TC and NRT
neurons were indistinguishable (Table 2). In addition to the stable
resting membrane potential at around −75 mV, some NRT neurons of
both strains displayed a prominent membrane potential bistability, as
described previously (Blethyn et al., 2006; Fuentealba et al., 2005).

This bistable behavior consisted of an oscillation between an “up
state” and a “down state” (data not shown). The “up state” was usually
initiated by a LTS crowned by a high frequency burst of action
potentials, which gave way to tonic action potential generation (data
not shown). The “up state” usually displayed membrane potentials in
the range of −40 to −55 mV, while membrane potentials in the “down
state” ranged from −50 to −65 mV. In some cases, rhythmic LTS
generation was observed during the “down state” (not shown). In both
strains, no intrinsic membrane potential rhythmicity was observed in
LGN neurons. Some CL neurons of both strains displayed spontaneous
LTS generation at sub-delta frequencies (data not shown).
Basic properties of the LTS of LGN, CL, and NRT neurons of WAG/Rij and
ACI rats
Next, the basic features of the LTS in LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons of
WAG/Rij and ACI rats were examined. Via DC current injection,
neurons were held at potentials around −60 mV, hyperpolarized to
−100 mV for 800 ms to deinactivate IT and repolarized to −60 mV (LGN
TC and CL neurons) or to −55 mV (NRT neurons). A stronger DC current
injection in NRT neurons was necessary to consistently evoke a LTS.

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

391

Fig. 5. The LTS of LGN TC, CL and NRT neurons. (A) Overlay of the LTS generated by a LGN TC neuron (grey trace) and a CL neuron (black trace). The LTS of CL neurons was of larger
amplitude than the LTS of LGN TC neurons, but oftentimes generated only a single action potential. In case only a single action potential was generated, CL neurons often displayed a
small amplitude membrane potential oscillation after the AP (indicated by the arrow). Both cells were taken from ACI rats. (B) Comparison of the LTS of two further LGN TC (upper
panel) and CL (lower panel) neurons. The LTS of the CL neuron is of larger overall size and longer duration than the LTS of the LGN TC neuron. Note the increased width of the 5th and
6th action potentials of the CL neuron. The LTS of NRT neurons are displayed in C and D. (C) The LTS generated by NRT neurons oftentimes fell into one of two categories. Lower
amplitude LTS evoked a large train of action potentials, displaying an accelerando/decelerando pattern (upper panel). The amplitudes of the action potentials generated in this
manner were inversely correlated to the amplitude of the LTS. LTS of higher amplitude generated action potentials only during the initial rising phase (lower panel). Both recordings
derive from the same ACI neuron. (D) In some NRT neurons, the LTS initiated upstate tonic action potential generation. Black lines below the recordings indicate DC current injection
duration and magnitude. Both recordings derive from another ACI NRT neuron.

The shape of the LTS was similar in neurons recorded in the same
nucleus of WAG/Rij and ACI rats. In comparison to CL neurons, the LTS
of LGN TC neurons revealed smaller amplitudes and shorter durations,
peaking at around 10–20 mV more negative values of the membrane
potential (LGN TC: ∼ −40 mV; CL: ∼−30 to −20 mV; Fig. 5A).
In the following, the number of LTS associated action potentials was
investigated. On average, the LTS of a LGN TC neuron evoked 2.4 ± 0.2
action potentials (n = 25) in WAG/Rij and 2.4 ± 0.2 action potentials
(n = 25) in ACI rats. The LTS of CL neurons oftentimes generated only a
single action potential (15 of 26 ACI CL, 19 of 39 WAG/Rij CL) (Fig. 5A). In
some of these cells, the initial action potential was followed by a
transient depolarization of small amplitude reminiscent of an action
potential, suggesting a depolarization block of INa, or a low amplitude
membrane potential oscillation (arrow in Fig. 5A). On average, the LTS
of a CL neuron evoked 2.3 ± 0.2 action potentials (n = 39) in WAG/Rij and
1.8 ± 0.2 action potentials (n = 26) in ACI rats. Furthermore, the LTS of CL
neurons was usually slow to decline (Fig. 5B). The LTS of NRT neurons
had a higher activation threshold and generated signiﬁcantly higher
numbers of action potentials than those of LGN TC and CL neurons. On
average, the LTS of a NRT neuron elicited 9.9 ± 1.7 action potentials
(n = 21) in WAG/Rij and 10.4 ± 1.2 action potentials (n = 39) in ACI rats
(Table 2). Two main patterns of action potential generation were
observed. Lower amplitude LTS evoked a large train of action
potentials, displaying an accelerando/decelerando pattern (Fig. 5C,
upper panel). The amplitudes of action potentials evoked in this
manner were inversely correlated to the amplitude of the LTS,
declining in amplitude from the beginning to the peak of the LTS and
increasing in amplitude while the LTS declined. A LTS of higher
amplitude generated action potentials only during the initial rising
phase (Fig. 5C, lower panel). These action potentials also declined in
amplitude as the LTS increased in amplitude. It is important to note,

that both patterns of LTS associated action potential generation could
be observed in the same neuron (Fig. 5C). In a subset of NRT neurons of
both strains the LTS initialized “up state” tonic action potential
generation (Fig. 5D).
In order to more clearly deduce whether variations in T-type Ca2+
currents cause alterations in LTS properties, we performed currentclamp experiments when Na+–K+ action potentials were blocked by
1 µM Tetrodotoxin (TTX, Figs. 6A–C). In the presence of TTX, the
qualitative differences between nuclei were preserved in both strains.
LGN TC neurons generated the smallest LTS (Fig. 6A), while CL (Fig. 6B)
and NRT (Fig. 6C) neurons displayed LTS of higher amplitude and
longer duration. The LTS of CL and LGN TC neurons were, except for the
larger size in CL neurons, of quite similar shape. The LTS of NRT
neurons differed by displaying slower rise and decay kinetics. No
differences in the overall shape of the LTS were observed between
WAG/Rij and ACI rats. The bistable behavior of a subset of NRT neurons
was preserved in the presence of TTX (data not shown).
Since a close functional antagonism between IT and the fast
transient A-type K+ current (IA) has been described in LGN TC and NRT
neurons (Meis et al., 1996; Pape et al., 1994) we further tried to isolate
IT generated LTS properties by blocking IA with 4-Aminopyridine (4AP, 5 mM) in combination with 1 µM TTX. Wash in of TTX and 4-AP
enlarged the LTS and removed all action potentials (Figs. 6D–F). No
qualitative differences were observed between strains. In LGN TC
neurons, application of TTX and 4-AP increased the amplitude and
prolonged the duration of the LTS (Fig. 6D, middle trace). In some
neurons the initial LTS onset was followed by a second depolarizing
rise of roughly equal slope (arrow in Fig. 6D, lower panel) probably
representing a high threshold Ca2+ spike (HTS) (Hernandez-Cruz and
Pape, 1989; Lo et al., 2002; Tennigkeit et al., 1998). It is important to
note, that both forms could be observed in the same neuron, as shown

392

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

Fig. 6. LTS of LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons under control conditions, in the presence of 1 µM TTX and under the inﬂuence of 1 µM TTX in combination with 5 mM 4-AP. Recordings in
the presence of TTX are shown in A, B, and C. The effects of co-application of TTX and 4-AP are shown in D, E, and F. Neurons were held at −60 mV hyperpolarized to −100 mV for
800 ms before being stepped to ∼− 60 mV (LGN TC and CL) or ∼−55 mV (NRT). The LTS of an LGN TC neuron is shown in A, the LTS of a CL neuron is shown in B, while C depicts the LTS
of a NRT neuron. The upper panels show recordings under control conditions, the lower panels display recordings in the presence of TTX. (D) LTS of a LGN TC neuron under control
conditions (upper panel) and in the presence of 1 µM TTX and 5 mM 4-AP (middle and lower panels). TTX and 4-AP transformed the LTS into a biphasic depolarization. The second
depolarization could be of lower slope than the ﬁrst (middle panel) or could be equally steep (arrow in the lower panel). The steep second depolarization shown in the lower panel
was termed a “high threshold spike” (HTS), see text. (E) LTS of a CL neuron under control conditions (upper panel) and in the presence of 1 µM TTX and 5 mM 4-AP (lower panel). In CL
neurons, drug application transformed the LTS into an initial depolarization, similar to the LTS of LGN TC neurons, and a slow depolarization. The slow depolarization could be of
varying amplitude and duration. A prominent example of the slow depolarization is shown here. (F) After application of 1 µM TTX and 5 mM 4-AP the LTS of NRT neurons usually
displayed one of three patterns: either the LTS was transformed into a single spike like depolarization (upper panel), which could be generated repetitively in some cells, or the LTS
was transformed into a spike which was followed by a plateau depolarization (middle and lower panel panels). This plateau could or could not be terminated by a second LTS like
depolarization in the same neuron. Black lines below the recordings indicate DC current injection duration and magnitude.

in Fig. 6D, and that the transition between the two phases could be
more subtle than displayed. Similar to the LTS, the HTS behaved in a
“nearly all or none manner” (Zhan et al., 1999), meaning either its
complete presence or absence. Furthermore, the HTS was more readily
observed when stronger/steeper depolarization was applied. In CL
neurons, application of TTX and 4-AP transformed the LTS into a
biphasic depolarization with an initial steep and transient component,
similar to the LTS of LGN TC neurons, followed by a slow depolarization of varying duration and amplitude (Fig. 6E). In NRT neurons three
patterns of LTS generation were observed after drug administration
(Fig. 6F). In a subset of NRT neurons, the LTS was transformed into a
single spike depolarization (Fig. 6F, upper panel), which could be
generated repetitively in some cells. In other neurons, the LTS changed
into a single spike followed by a plateau depolarization of varying
duration, displaying low amplitude membrane potential oscillations
(Fig. 6F, middle panel), reminiscent of the “up state” (see above). This
plateau potential could sometimes be terminated by a second spike
depolarization (Fig. 6F, lower panel).
Quantiﬁcation of the LTS onset potential and the minimum LTS
generating slope using current ramp stimulation
To correlate the IT properties recorded under voltage clamp
conditions with the LTS and to test the predictions of the mathematical model, we used current ramp stimulations. The experiments
were designed to obtain a measure of the LTS onset potential and to
investigate the stimulus intensity necessary for LTS generation.
Depolarizing current ramps were applied from a holding potential
of − 75 mV (Fig. 7). The slope of the current ramp induced
depolarization was decreased until LTS generation ceased (Fig. 7). As
has been observed previously, the LTS behaved in a “nearly all or none”

manner (Zhan et al., 1999), meaning that it was present or absent with
only very rarely displaying an intermediate size. The depolarization
slope was decreased using two protocols: (1) Stimulation intensity was
decreased, while the duration of the current ramps was kept constant
(5 s). (2) Duration of the current ramps was increased, while the
stimulation intensity was kept constant. Similar results were obtained
with both paradigms. In the following only the results from the ﬁrst
paradigm using decreasing stimulation intensity will be presented. For
quantiﬁcation of LTS parameters, the LTS onset point was computed
using the ﬁrst derivative of the voltage trace. As described previously
by Gutierrez et al. (2001), the LTS onset point was deﬁned as the point
where the slopes of 4 consecutive binned data points exceeded the
baseline slope (see Experimental methods). Baseline slopes were
obtained by a Gaussian ﬁt of the differentiated membrane voltage
prior to ramp stimulation (see Experimental methods). In a series of
ramp stimulations with decreasing slopes the following parameters
were obtained: (1) where applicable the voltage of the LTS onset point
of the ﬁrst LTS, (2) the minimum slope eliciting a LTS, and (3) the
maximum slope eliciting no LTS, thereby setting the limits of a slope
interval which includes the true minimal LTS generating slope.
Application of depolarizing current ramps from −75 mV led to the
generation of one or more LTS, followed by tonic action potential
generation, if stimulation intensity was strong enough (Fig. 7).
Decreasing the stimulation intensity ﬁrst led to the disappearance of
tonic action potentials, and subsequently to the disappearance of the
LTS. In some cases ramps with shallow slope did not lead to LTS
generation even though the threshold potential was reached. To
account for this phenomenon the theoretical minimum slope
necessary to reach the LTS onset potential was calculated for each
neuron and the difference between this value and the minimal slope
actually eliciting a LTS in the experiment was analyzed.

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

393

Fig. 7. LTS elicited via current ramp stimulation in LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons. Single representative voltage traces are shown on the left side. The right side displays examples of the
effects of stimulations of decreasing slope. Tonic action potentials disappeared ﬁrst, followed by the disappearance of the LTS. Recordings from LGN TC neurons are shown in A,
recordings from CL neurons are displayed in B, and recordings from NRT neurons are shown in C.

The LTS onset potentials varied little when elicited through current
ramps of decreasing stimulus intensity in individual neurons. In both
strains, NRT neurons displayed signiﬁcantly more positive LTS onset
potentials when compared to LGN TC and CL neurons (∼ −50 to
−55 mV in NRT vs. ∼−60 to −65 mV in LGN TC and CL; Fig. 8A, Table 2).
LGN TC neurons displayed a slightly more depolarized LTS onset
potential than CL neurons in WAG/Rij, while the opposite was found in
ACI. The difference between LGN TC and CL neurons was signiﬁcant in
ACI. A comparison between WAG/Rij and ACI revealed ACI LGN TC
neurons to generate the LTS at signiﬁcantly more negative potentials
when compared to WAG/Rij LGN TC neurons (Table 2).
In the following, the minimum depolarization slope leading to the
generation of a LTS was analyzed. The minimal LTS generating slope
varied between nuclei (Fig. 8B). In both strains, LGN TC neurons
displayed the largest minimal LTS generating slope, while minimal LTS
generating slopes in CL and NRT neurons were roughly similar (∼8 to
11 mV/s in LGN TC vs. ∼ 5 mV/s in CL and NRT, Table 2). In both strains,
minimal LTS generating slopes were signiﬁcantly higher in LGN TC
neurons when compared to CL and NRT neurons, while differences
between CL and NRT neurons were not signiﬁcant. Furthermore, the
minimal LTS generating slopes recorded in WAG/Rij LGN TC neurons
were signiﬁcantly smaller in comparison to the minimal LTS
generating slopes recorded in ACI LGN TC neurons (Table 2). The
relation between nuclei and strains observed for the maximum slope
without LTS generation was similar to the results for the minimum
slope generating a LTS (Fig. 8B).
Next, the difference between the calculated slope required for
reaching the LTS onset potential and the measured minimal LTS
generating slope was investigated. In both strains this difference was
greatest in LGN TC neurons, with CL neurons displaying intermediate

differences and minimal differences being observed in NRT neurons
(Fig. 8C, Table 2). Within both strains, all differences between nuclei
were signiﬁcant. A comparison between strains revealed signiﬁcant
differences for LGN TC neurons (Table 2). Furthermore, these
differences inversely correlated with the T-type Ca2+ current density
within both strains, with cells displaying lower T-current density
revealing a greater difference (Fig. 8D). This correlation was found to
be nearly linear. It should be noted, however, that for neurons in the CL
and NRT the higher T-current density in WAG/Rij compared to ACI did
not translate into smaller differences between the minimal measured
LTS generating slope and the minimal slope reaching the LTS onset
potential.
In the following, LTS parameters were quantiﬁed in the presence of
TTX (1 µM). An analysis of the LTS onset potentials and the minimal
depolarization slopes leading to LTS generation during current ramp
stimulation revealed no effect of TTX on the LTS onset potential in LGN
TC and CL neurons of both strains (Figs. 9A, B). In contrast, the LTS
onset potential of NRT neurons was depolarized by about 8 mV in both
strains (from −52 ± 3 to −44 ± 1 mV in ACI, from −56 ± 2 to −49 ± 2 mV in
WAG/Rij, in both strains n = 3, Fig. 9C). Furthermore the minimal LTS
generating slope was increased in all neurons (Figs. 9A–C; Table 2),
indicating the contribution of persistent sodium currents (INaP) to the
depolarization preceding an LTS. This effect was strongest in NRT
neurons in both strains. Within both strains, LGN TC neurons, NRT
neurons, and CL neurons revealed the greatest, intermediate, and
smallest difference between the minimal LTS generating slope and the
slope needed to cross the LTS onset potential, respectively. When
strains were compared, neurons of WAG/Rij rats displayed smaller
differences between the minimal LTS generating slope and the slope
required to reach the LTS onset potential in all nuclei (Table 2).

394

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

Fig. 8. Quantiﬁcation of current ramp experiments. (A) The LTS onset potential of WAG/Rij (black) and ACI (white) LGN TC (left), CL (middle), and NRT (right) neurons. (B)
Approximated minimal LTS generating slopes in WAG/Rij (black) and ACI (white) LGN TC (left), CL (middle), and NRT (right) neurons. For each population of neurons (e.g. WAG/Rij
LGN TC, ACI LGN TC, WAG/Rij CL etc.) the upper square represents the mean minimal slope, which triggered a LTS in the experiment. The lower square represents the mean maximal
slope, which did not trigger a LTS. The horizontal lines represent the mean minimum slope required to cross the LTS onset potential. (C) Difference between the minimal LTS
generating slope and the minimal slope required to cross the LTS onset potential. (D) Correlation of the difference between the minimal LTS generating slope and the minimal slope
required to cross the LTS onset potential and the T-type Ca2+ current density. The linear ﬁt of the correlation for ACI is shown in grey (r = 0.999). The linear ﬁt for WAG/Rij is depicted in
black (r = 0.958).

Fig. 9. Minimal LTS generating slopes during current ramp stimulation (from −75 mV, 5 s duration) under control conditions (grey traces) with the minimal LTS generating slopes in the
presence of 1 µM TTX (A, B, C, black traces), or 1 µM TTX and 5 mM 4-AP (D, E, F, black traces). The LTS of LGN TC neurons are shown in (A) and (D), CL neurons are shown in (B) and (E),
and NRT neurons are depicted in (C) and (F). Note the increased minimal LTS generating slope in all nuclei under the inﬂuence of 1 µM TTX (A, B, C). The combined effect of 1 µM TTX and
5 mM 4-AP reduced the minimal LTS generating slope in LGN TC neurons (D), while leaving the minimal LTS generating slopes of CL and NRT neurons basically unchanged (E, F).

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

395

Discussion
The present study investigated the expression of T-channel coding
mRNA, as well as the IT , and the LTS in three functionally distinct
thalamic nuclei of WAG/Rij and ACI rats. Results show that distinct Tchannel expression patterns translate into different T-currents, which
give rise to different LTS. While a good correlation between T-channel
coding mRNA and IT was observed, the correlation between IT and the
LTS was more complex, suggesting the contribution of additional
factors. When WAG/Rij and ACI rats are compared, this study indicates
that the LTS is similar in both strains, despite quantitative differences in
IT . For LGN TC neurons, a population of prototypical speciﬁc thalamocortical relay neurons, an increased robustness of LTS generation was
observed in WAG/Rij. If this ﬁnding extends to other populations of TC
neurons, the increased robustness of burst ﬁring could be implicated in
the generation and/or maintenance of SWD, which is thought to be
accompanied by thalamic burst mode transmission.
Relation of tissue mRNA expression and neuronal subpopulations in the
LGN, CL, and NRT

Fig. 10. The LTS onset point during current ramp stimulation. Prior to the beginning of
the current ramp, a constant DC current was injected. This period is indicated by the left
and middle lines connecting the upper 2 panels. The upper panel displays a voltage
trace obtained using current ramp stimulation (in the presence of TTX and 4-AP) and
the middle trace displays the differentiated voltage trace shown in the upper panel. The
derivatives of the period of constant DC current injection were ﬁtted with a Gaussian
function. The LTS onset point was deﬁned as the point were 4 consecutive derivatives
exceeded the upper 95% conﬁdence limit of the Gaussian ﬁt of the baseline period and is
indicated by the right line connecting the upper 2 panels. Subsequently, the voltage
trace between the beginning of current ramp stimulation (middle line connecting the
upper two panels, left ellipse in the lower panel) and the LTS onset point (right line
connecting upper two panels and right ellipse in the lower panel) was ﬁt with a linear
equation (line in the lower panel), yielding the depolarization slope. See also Gutierrez
et al., 2001.

In a next step TTX and 4-AP (1 µM and 5 mM, respectively) were
co-applied to thalamic slices. The LTS onset potential was hyperpolarized to −66 ± 1 mV (n = 11) in ACI CL, with no changes observed in the
other two nuclei or in WAG/Rij. The minimal slope leading to LTS
generation did not change much in NRT neurons of both strains (Fig.
9F), but was decreased in LGN TC and CL neurons, although this effect
was small in the CL (Figs. 9D, E; Table 2). When strains were compared,
neurons of WAG/Rij rats displayed smaller differences between the
minimal LTS generating slope and the slope required to reach the LTS
onset potential in all nuclei (Table 2).

In agreement with previous studies (Talley et al., 1999) and the
results of RT-PCR experiments on isolated neurons (Broicher et al.,
2007a), the thalamic relay nuclei of WAG/Rij and ACI rats primarily
expressed the α1G isoform, while the NRT was found to primarily
express the α1H and α1I isoforms. In addition to α1G, expression of
the α1I isoform was detected in the LGN and CL. While α1I
expression can be attributed to local circuit interneurons in the LGN
(Broicher et al., 2007a), the cell type speciﬁc attribution of
expression signals in the CL is less clear. Electrophysiological
evidence as well as anatomical tracing studies indicate a uniform
population of neurons displaying similar electrophysiological characteristics as well as homogeneous axonal projections (Deschenes et
al., 1996; Lacey et al., 2007; Van der Werf et al., 2002; Yasukawa et
al., 2004). It is thus reasonable to assume that both splice variations
of the α1G isoform as well as the α1I isoform are present in typical
CL neurons.
In case of the reticular nucleus, a functional distinction between
bursting and non-bursting neurons, which either do or do not posses
a T-type Ca2+ conductance is proposed by some authors (Lee et al.,
2007). Furthermore, a subpopulation of NRT neurons has been
described to display a membrane potential bistability (Blethyn et al.,
2006; Fuentealba et al., 2005). All NRT neurons recorded during the
course of this study possessed a T-type Ca2+ conductance or a LTS,
while a subpopulation of NRT neurons displayed membrane
potential bistability. There was no obvious correlation between the
presence and absence of bistable behavior and LTS properties or
other cellular parameters investigated in this study. The expression
α1H and α1I observed in NRT tissue samples is thus interpreted to
correspond to an expression of both isoforms in typical NRT neurons.
Correlation of T-channel coding mRNA and IT in neurons of the LGN, CL,
and NRT
The relation of the T-type Ca2+ current voltage dependencies of
activation and inactivation, as well as the relation of the activation
and inactivation kinetics between LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons
within both strains matched the predictions from studies on cloned
channels (Chemin et al., 2001, 2002; Emerick et al., 2006): (i) As has
been shown before (Broicher et al., 2007a), LGN TC neurons solely
express the α1G-a isoform. This correlates well with an IT of
comparatively negative voltage dependency and fast kinetics. (ii)
Neurons of the CL displayed T-type Ca2+ currents of intermediate
voltage dependency and kinetics. These neurons expressed both the
α1G-a, and the α1G-bc splice variants, as well as the α1I isoform.
The IT voltage dependency of activation of CL neurons can be

396

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

explained by the presence of the α1G-bc splice variation and the α1I
isoform or by a combination of both (Chemin et al., 2001, 2002;
Emerick et al., 2006). Furthermore, currents carried by α1G
(irrespective of splice variation) display considerably faster current
kinetics than currents carried by α1I, while the differences in IT
kinetics between α1G-a and α1G-bc splice variations are rather
moderate by comparison (Chemin et al., 2001, 2002; Emerick et al.,
2006). Together with the current properties of LGN TC (primarily
α1G-a) and NRT (primarily α1I) neurons and the higher expression
of α1G than α1I (∼ 16 times, under the assumption of similar primer/
probe efﬁciency), these data argue for a stronger contribution of
α1G-bc than α1I in CL neurons. (iii) In NRT neurons, the slow
kinetics of activation and inactivation argue for a stronger inﬂuence
of the α1I isoform than the α1H isoform on the whole-cell T-type
Ca2+ current. Further support of this notion comes from experiments
investigating the deactivation kinetics of IT . Here, the IT of NRT
neurons displayed faster kinetics than the IT of LGN TC and CL
neurons (T.B. and T.B., unpublished observations), which correlates
well with the fast deactivation kinetics of α1I carried currents in
heterologous expression systems. This interpretation is further
supported by the ∼ 2.5-times higher expression of α1I coding
mRNA in comparison to α1H coding mRNA (under the assumption
of similar primer/probe efﬁciency) in the NRT.
Correlation of T-channel coding mRNA and IT in neurons of WAG/Rij
and ACI
Neurons recorded in all three nuclei of WAG/Rij rats displayed
increased IT densities when compared to ACI. This ﬁnding is in good
agreement with the increased expression of T-channel coding mRNA
in WAG/Rij. Surprisingly, and in contrast to previous recordings
performed on isolated neurons of the LGN (Broicher et al., 2007a), IT
voltage dependencies were different between neurons of the same
nucleus recorded in WAG/Rij and ACI in brain slice preparations. LGN
TC neurons and CL neurons of WAG/Rij displayed more negative IT
voltage dependencies in comparison to ACI, while NRT neurons of
WAG/Rij were found to display slightly more positive IT voltage
dependencies. The molecular data suggests that this difference is
neither due to differences in isoform expression or alternative splicing
of exons 25/26, nor caused by a different ratio of isoform quantities. It
should be kept in mind however, that alternative splicing in other
regions of the pre-mRNA may underlie the observed differences. A
previously described mathematical model, investigating the effects of
different somatodendritic T-type Ca2+ channel distributions on the
somatically recorded IT voltage dependency, offers a possible
explanation for this unexpected ﬁnding (Broicher et al., 2007a). The
model has shown that an increased distal dendritic T-channel
localization results in a negative shift of the somatically recorded Ttype Ca2+ current voltage dependency. Possibly, there is a difference in
the localization of T-type Ca2+ channels between thalamocortical
neurons of WAG/Rij and ACI. This differential channel distribution
could cause a difference in the somatically recorded T-type Ca2+
current voltage dependency in brain slice preparations, but would be
undetectable in acutely isolated neurons, which lack most of their
distal dendrites (Destexhe et al., 1998; Zhang et al., 2002). It has been
shown that the synaptic terminals of inhibitory NRT and excitatory
cortical afferents are located on the distal dendrites of TC neurons
(Sherman and Guillery, 2006). An increased T-channel density in this
region may thus augment TC neuron burst ﬁring and contribute to
SWD in WAG/Rij rats (Budde et al., 2006).
General correlation of IT with the LTS in LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons of
WAG/Rij and ACI rats
The most straight forward correlation of IT and the LTS could be
established for the relationship between current density and the size

of the LTS. NRT and CL neurons displayed LTS of higher amplitude and
longer duration than LGN TC neurons. Another central ﬁnding of the
present study is that the LTS recorded in LGN TC, CL, and NRT neurons
are qualitatively different, while the LTS recorded in the same nucleus
of WAG/Rij and ACI rats are qualitatively similar. Although differences
in T-type Ca2+ currents can be expected to be the primary cause for
differences in the LTS, a number of other factors inﬂuence shape and
amplitude of the LTS. These factors include channel distribution, cell
geometry, K+ currents activating below threshold (IA), Ca2+-dependent
K+ currents (IKCa), the persistent sodium current (INaP), and the
hyperpolarization-activated cation current (Ih) (Broicher et al., 2007a;
Destexhe et al., 1998; Mainen and Sejnowski, 1996; van Ooyen et al.,
2002; Williams and Stuart, 2000; Zhang et al., 2002).
In an attempt to exclude some of these complicating factors we
used the Na+ current blocker TTX. Indeed this maneuver more clearly
dissected the shape of the LTS. While the mainly α1G-based Ca2+
currents in LGN TC and CL neurons generated spikes of similar shape
(with LTS amplitudes being higher in CL neurons), the α1I/α1H-based
IT of NRT neurons generated an LTS of slower rise and decay kinetics
and thus longer duration. Although TTX was helpful for the
interpretation of step responses, it created additional complicating
factors for the analysis of ramp responses since blocking of INaP altered
the steepness of the ramp. The additional block of IA by 4-AP allowed
the occurrence of HTS possibly due to the activation of high voltageactivated (HVA) Ca2+ channels, distal dendritic T-type Ca2+ channels,
or a combination of both (Crunelli et al., 2006; Hernandez-Cruz and
Pape, 1989; Lo et al., 2002; Tennigkeit et al., 1998) thereby masking the
exact LTS shape. The HTS was only observed in LGN TC and CL neurons,
but never in NRT neurons. The rising phase of the LTS in TTX/4-AP was
rapid in all cell types, thereby demonstrating the inﬂuence of 4-AP
sensitive currents. These ﬁndings demonstrate that a clear correlation
between T-type Ca2+ current properties and LTS is difﬁcult to achieve.
Correlation of IT voltage dependency and the LTS in neurons of the LGN,
CL, and NRT of WAG/Rij and ACI rats
With keeping the above mentioned problems in mind the LTS
onset potential was used in an attempt to ﬁnd a correlation with the
voltage dependency of IT activation. The LTS onset potential was
approximated by an algorithm using the increasing voltage slopes
(dV /dt) during LTS generation. Computational modeling predicted the
LTS onset potential to correlate with the voltage dependency of IT
activation. Overall this suggestion was corroborated by the experimental data retrieved from both strains. Only the LTS onset potential
of WAG/Rij LGN TC neurons seems too depolarized with respect to the
Vh value of IT activation. A possible explanation for this ﬁnding comes
from the fact that the LTS is shaped by Ih (Pape, 1996; Ying et al., 2006).
Since it has been shown that the voltage dependency of Ih is shifted to
more hyperpolarized potentials in WAG/Rij compared to ACI LGN TC
neurons, the weaker Ih-induced overshoot may contribute to the more
depolarized LTS onset in WAG/Rij (Budde et al., 2005). While there
seems to be no inﬂuence of Na+ currents on the LTS onset potential in
LGN TC and CL neurons, a strong depolarization was observed in NRT
neurons. Interestingly, the depolarization of the LTS onset potential
was not observed after wash in of TTX/4-AP, pointing to a scenario
where TTX and 4-AP sensitive components exert equal, functionally
antagonistic inﬂuences on the LTS onset potential in NRT neurons.
Correlation of T-current density and the LTS in neurons of the LGN, CL,
and NRT of WAG/Rij and ACI rats
The number of LTS associated action potentials was predicted to be
inﬂuenced by the T-type Ca2+ current density by the mathematical
model. In the model, an increased IT density resulted in an increased
number of action potentials. Despite the increased IT density in WAG/
Rij no differences in the number of LTS associated action potentials

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

were found between WAG/Rij and ACI neurons of the same type,
indicating that single bursts of individual thalamic neurons are
unchanged in WAG/Rij rats.
Furthermore, a clear correlation of the T-type Ca2+ current density
and the depolarizing slopes required to elicit a LTS was observed in
ramp stimulation experiments. The comparison between the difference of the minimal slope required to reach the LTS onset potential
and the minimal slope eliciting a LTS revealed a nearly linear
correlation with the T-current density within both strains. Applied
to an in vivo situation, this ﬁnding suggests that weaker depolarizations from hyperpolarized membrane potentials are sufﬁcient to elicit
a LTS in CL and NRT neurons in comparison to LGN TC neurons,
provided that the potential for the regenerative activation process is
reached.
Wash in of TTX increased the minimal LTS generating slopes as
well as the differences between the minimal LTS generating slopes
and the minimal slope required to cross the LTS onset potential in all
neurons tested, indicating a contribution of the persistent sodium
current. When TTX was co-applied with 4-AP, LTS generating slopes
decreased in LGN TC and CL neurons (although this effect was very
small in ACI CL neurons), but not in NRT neurons. Together with the
effect of TTX on the LTS onset potential in NRT these data point to a
different contribution of TTX and 4-AP sensitive conductances in relay
(LGN TC and CL) and NRT neurons.
When strains were compared, the correlation between the Tcurrent density and the LTS generating slopes was less clear. Here,
signiﬁcant differences were found between LGN TC, but not
between CL or NRT neurons of WAG/Rij and ACI rats. Still, this
ﬁnding indicates a more robust LTS generation in a speciﬁc thalamic
relay nucleus of epileptic WAG/Rij rats. An increased likelihood of
burst generation in WAG/Rij rats is in good agreement with an
absence epilepsy phenotype, as thalamic burst mode transmission is
thought to coincide with SWDs. Possibly, the lack of difference
between CL and NRT neurons of WAG/Rij and ACI rats is due to the
very small differences between the LTS onset potential crossing
slope and the minimal LTS generating slope observed in these
neurons. It cannot be excluded that our detection method was
insufﬁcient to resolve subtle differences between these two
neuronal populations. Under the inﬂuence of TTX and TTX/4-AP,
LTS generating slopes were smaller in WAG/Rij when compared to
ACI. This ﬁnding ﬁts well with the increased IT density observed in
the WAG/Rij strain.
Comparison to other models of absence epilepsy
Abnormalities in T-type Ca2+ channels have been implicated in the
rodent and human absence phenotype for a long time and an
augmentation of thalamic IT seems to be a general motive in rodent
models of absence epilepsy (Budde et al., 2006; Crunelli and
Leresche, 2002; Pinault and O'Brien, 2007). An increased IT has
been observed in TC neurons of several mutant mouse strains
(tottering, lethargic, stargazer, coloboma) and α1A knock-out mice
displaying an absence phenotype with ataxia (Song et al., 2004;
Zhang et al., 2002, 2004). Crossbreeding α1G knock-out mice with
these mutant mice abolishes SWD in the progeny (Song et al., 2004).
Studies in Genetic Absence Epilepsy Rats from Strasbourg (GAERS)
revealed an increased IT and expression of α1H mRNA in the NRT of
pre-seizure and adult rats (Kuisle et al., 2006; Talley et al., 2000;
Tsakiridou et al., 1995), thereby indicating the importance of burst
activity in the NRT in the absence phenotype. This view is further
supported by the ﬁnding that SWDs in mice are unaltered with a
genetically induced 25% reduction of α1G carried IT, which is
presumably restricted to thalamic relay and cortical neurons, but
probably leaves the α1H and α1I carried IT of NRT neurons
unchanged (Song et al., 2004). Therefore, an enhanced IT in distinct
thalamic regions might be tightly linked to SWD expression.

397

Experimental methods
The experimental procedures were applied on rats of both strains
(WAG/Rij and ACI) in an identical manner. All experiments were
performed on rats of both sexes. Unless stated otherwise, all chemicals
were obtained from Sigma (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany). All animal
procedures were approved by the local authorities.
Preparation of brain slices for electrophysiology
For patch-clamp experiments on brain slices, rats (postnatal day
15 to 25, P15 to P25) were deeply anesthetized with isoﬂurane
(Forene, Abbott) and decapitated. Brains were removed and placed
in cold, oxygenated sodium free artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid (ACSF)
containing (mM): sucrose, 210; PIPES, 20; KCl, 2.4; MgCl2, 10; CaCl2,
0.5; dextrose, 10; pH 7.25 with NaOH. The cerebellum and the
anterior third of the brain were removed before the brain was glued
on the rostral side onto a vibratome (Model 1000, Ted Pella,
Redding, CA), doused with cold sodium free, high sucrose ACSF and
cut into coronal slices (300 µm). Brain slices containing the LGN and
the CL were transferred into a holding chamber. For recordings in
the NRT, horizontal brain slices were used. These were obtained by
removing the brain as described above, and gluing the ventral side
onto a vibratome. Three hundred µm thick horizontal slices were
obtained and transferred into a holding chamber. The holding
chamber was ﬁlled with identical solutions for coronal and horizontal slices, which were composed of (mM): CaCl2, 3; KCl, 2.5;
NaCl, 125; MgSO4, 4; NaH2PO4, 1.25; NaHCO3, 22; dextrose, 10; pH
∼7.4, gassed with carbogen. Slices were heated for 20 min to 30 °C
before being cooled to room temperature, and allowed to rest for 60
to 90 min.
Electrophysiology
Whole-cell recordings in brain slice preparations were done
using glass pipettes (GC150T-10, Clark Electromedical Instruments,
Pangbourne, UK) connected to an EPC-10 ampliﬁer (HEKA Elektronik, Friedland, Germany). Pulse software (HEKA) was used for
stimulus application and the recording of data. Electrode resistances
ranged from 1.8 to 2.5 MΩ. Input resistances ranged from 200 to
800 MΩ, while series resistances ranged from 5 to 15 MΩ. All
recordings were performed at room temperature. The following
recording solutions were used to isolate Ca2+ currents in voltage
clamp experiments: i) Extracellular solution (mM): CaCl2, 1.5; KCl,
2.5; NaCl, 120; MgSO4, 2; NaH2PO4, 1.25; HEPES, 30; dextrose, 10;
4-AP, 2; TEA, 5; TTX, 0.0005; pH 7.24 with NaOH. ii) Intracellular
solution (mM): Cs-gluconate, 80; Cs3-citrate, 10; NaCl, 10; HEPES, 10;
EGTA, 11; CaCl2, 1; MgCl2, 1; KCl, 1; TEA-Cl, 15; QX-314, 1 mg/ml
internal solution; Biocytin, 3 mg/ml internal solution; Mg-ATP, 3;
Na2-GTP, 0.5; phosphocreatine, 15; pH 7.25 with CsOH; ∼290 mOsm.
For current-clamp experiments in brain slice preparations the
following recording solutions were used: i) Extracellular solution
(mM): CaCl2, 1.5; KCl, 2.5; NaCl, 120; MgSO4, 2; NaH2PO4, 1.25;
HEPES, 30; dextrose, 10; pH 7.24 with NaOH; ∼300 mOsm. ii)
Intracellular solution (mM): CaCl2, 0.5; NaCl, 10; MgCl2, 1; HEPES, 10;
K-BAPTA, 5; K-gluconate, 95; K3-citrate, 20; phosphocreatine, 15;
Na2-GTP, 0.5; Mg-ATP, 3; Biocytin, 3 mg/ml internal solution; pH 7.24
with KOH; ∼ 290 mOsm.
Analysis of electrophysiological data
All current traces of voltage clamp experiments were subjected to
off-line subtraction of the linear leak according to Ohm's law, using
custom made software (Patch by Bernd Letz, HEKA).
The maximum T-type Ca2+ current amplitude observed during the
steady-state activation protocol was taken as the maximum T-current

398

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399

amplitude for each individual neuron. This amplitude was used for the
calculation of T-current density.
The inactivation time constant of the T-type Ca2+ current was
obtained by ﬁtting a mono-exponential decay function to the
inactivating part of the T-current trace using PulseFit software. The
function had the following form:
Y ¼ A þ Imax e−x=t

ð1Þ

Numerical analysis of current-clamp data was done using
MATLAB® software (MathWorks). For analysis of current ramps, data
were binned (9.8 ms intervals) and differentiated. To approximate the
beginning of the LTS we adapted a method described by Gutierrez et
al. (2001). Brieﬂy, the recorded voltage prior to ramp stimulation
(baseline) was differentiated and ﬁtted with a Gaussian function (Fig.
10). The LTS onset point was deﬁned as the ﬁrst point after which 4
consecutive slopes of binned data exceeded the upper 95% conﬁdence
limit of the Gaussian ﬁt of the baseline (Fig. 10) (Gutierrez et al., 2001).
Subsequently, the data between the onset point of ramp stimulation
and the onset of the LTS were ﬁtted with a linear equation. The voltage
of the LTS onset point, and the slope between the beginning of the
stimulation and the LTS onset point were used for analysis. In case of
ramp stimulations without LTS generation, the entire ramp was ﬁtted
with a linear function.
Laser capturing of thalamic tissue
All solutions used during the preparation of slices for laser capturing
were prepared with DEPC treated water and RNAse free components.
Rat brains (P18–28) were removed, embedded in tissue freezing
medium (Tissue-Tek, Science Services, Munich, Germany) and stored
at −80 °C for further processing. Later, brains were placed into a cryomicrotome (−12 to −16 °C) and allowed to equilibrate for ∼1 h. Then,
brains were cut into 16 µm thick slices and placed onto Poly-L-Lysin
(0.05%) treated membrane coated object slides (PALM MembraneSlides,
P.A.L.M. Microlaser Technologies AG, Bernried, Germany). Afterwards,
the brain slices were stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (Hematoxylin
1 min; 3× wash in DEPC-H2O for 1, 2, and 3 min; Eosin 30 s; increasing
ethanol series, 50%, 70%, 100% for 3 min each; air dried at room
temperature) and placed under an inverted laser capture microscope (P.
A.L.M. Microlaser Technologies AG). The LGN, CL, and NRT were shot
into mineral oil ﬁlled caps of laboratory tubes and frozen in liquid
nitrogen to be subjected to RT-PCR procedures.
RT-PCR procedures
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis was performed on LGN, CL, and NRT
tissue yielded through laser capturing. The mRNA of laser captured
tissue was transcribed into cDNA using oligo(dT)18 primers (Roche,
Germany) and the Sensiscript RT Kit (Quiagen, Hilden, Germany).
The hybridization primer/probe assays for real-time PCR detection
were purchased from Applied Biosystems. The following intron
spanning assay-on-demand probes were used: α1G: Rn0058105_m1;
α1H: Rn01460351_g1; α1I: Rn00571684_m1; β2-microglobulin:
Rn00560865_m1. Real-time PCR was performed using the TaqMan
universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) and the ABI Prism 7000
Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems); PCR program was:
2 min at 50 °C,10 min at 95 °C, 50 cycles: 15 s at 95 °C and 1 min at 60 °C.
Results were analyzed with the ABI Prism 7000 SDS software. The
efﬁciency of real-time primer/probes was nearly identical. Quantiﬁcation was done using the comparative CT or ΔΔCT method as described
earlier (Budde et al., 2005). Non-quantitative RT-PCR for detection of
splice variations of the CACNA1G transcript was performed on CL tissue
samples obtained through laser capturing (Broicher et al., 2007a).
GAPDH expression was checked as a positive control. The PCR protocol
for GAPDH ampliﬁcation was: 3 min 94 °C; 50 cycles (30 s 94 °C, 1 min

61 °C, 1 min 72 °C); 7 min 72 °C; ∞ 4 °C. Primer sequences for GAPDH
(nucleotides 789–1028, accession no. NM017008) were: forward, 5′TGATGACATCAAGAAGGTGGTGAA-3′; reverse, 5′-TCCTTGGAGGCCATGTAGGCCAT-3′. Ampliﬁcation of the exon 25, 26 region was done using a
nested PCR approach. The PCR protocol for the multiplex step was:
3 min 94 °C; 50 cycles (30 s 94 °C, 1 min 62 °C, 1 min 72 °C); 7 min 72 °C;
∞ 4 °C. The PCR protocol for the nested step was: 3 min 94 °C; 35 cycles
(30 s 94 °C, 1 min 64 °C, 1 min 72 °C); 7 min 72 °C; ∞ 4 °C. Primer
sequences for the multiplex step were (nucleotides 4557–5361;
accession no. AF290212): forward, 5′-CAGCAGCCCATCATGAACCACAAC-3′; reverse, 5′-GCCGACCCAAGCCCTCACAAG-3′. Primer sequences
for the nested step were (nucleotides 4709–5034; accession no.
AF290212): forward, 5′-GCGGCGTGAGGAGAAGCGACTAC-3′; reverse,
5′-CCTGGAAGAAACGGCGGAAGC-3′. For all non-quantitative PCRs the
Taq DNA Polymerase (5 U/µl, Quiagen) was used.
Computational modeling
For simulations on the effects of different T-current characteristics
on the LTS, a single compartment TC neuron model was used, as
described previously (Hines and Carnevale, 2001; Meuth et al., 2006).
The model was based on the mathematical description of IK leak, INa leak,
IL, IT, INa HH, INaP, IK HH, IA, and IKCa. Neuronal membrane potential was
described by the following equation: CM(dV/dt) = −IM + Iinject. IM is the
sum of all membrane currents, Iinject is the injected current, and CM is
the membrane capacitance. The model was capable of generating
action potentials in both burst and tonic transmission modes.
Simulations were carried out at 35 °C using the NEURON simulation
environment (Hines and Carnevale, 2001).
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank A. Jahn, A. Ritter, and R. Ziegler for
their excellent technical assistance. This work was supported by grants
from DFG (Pa 336/17-1 to H-C.P. and Bu 1019/8-1 to T. Budde), MPG
(Research Award to H-C.P.), IZKF (Bud 3/005/07 to T. Budde), and IMF
(Bu 120 501 to T. Budde). T. Broicher was a fellow of the Boehringer
Ingelheim Foundation.
References
Anderson, M.P., Mochizuki, T., Xie, J., Fischler, W., Manger, J.P., Talley, E.M., Scammell, T.E.,
Tonegawa, S., 2005. Thalamic Cav3.1 T-type Ca2+ channel plays a crucial role in
stabilizing sleep. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 1743–1748.
Avoli, M., Rogawski, M.A., Avanzini, G., 2001. Generalized epileptic disorders: an update.
Epilepsia 42, 445–457.
Blethyn, K.L., Hughes, S.W., Toth, T.I., Cope, D.W., Crunelli, V., 2006. Neuronal basis of
the slow (b1 Hz) oscillation in neurons of the nucleus reticularis thalami in vitro.
J. Neurosci. 26, 2474–2486.
Broicher, T., Kanyshkova, T., Landgraf, P., Rankovic, V., Meuth, P., Meuth, S.G., Pape, H.C.,
Budde, T., 2007a. Speciﬁc expression of low-voltage-activated calcium channel
isoforms and splice variants in thalamic local circuit interneurons. Mol. Cell.
Neurosci. 36, 132–145.
Broicher, T., Seidenbecher, T., Meuth, P., Munsch, T., Meuth, S.G., Kanyshkova, T., Pape, H.C.,
Budde, T., 2007b. T-current related effects of antiepileptic drugs and a Ca2+ channel
antagonist on thalamic relay and local circuit interneurons in a rat model of absence
epilepsy. Neuropharmacology 53, 431–446.
Budde, T., Caputi, L., Kanyshkova, T., Staak, R., Abrahamczik, C., Munsch, T., Pape, H.C.,
2005. Impaired regulation of thalamic pacemaker channels through an imbalance
of subunit expression in absence epilepsy. J. Neurosci. 25, 9871–9882.
Budde, T., Pape, H.-C., Kumar, S.S., Huguenard, J.R., 2006. Thalamic, thalamo-cortical,
and cortico-cortical models of epilepsy with an emphasis on absence seizures. In:
Pitkänen, A., Schwartzkroin, P.A., Moshé, S.L. (Eds.), Models of Seizures and
Epilepsy. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 73–88.
Chemin, J., Monteil, A., Bourinet, E., Nargeot, J., Lory, P., 2001. Alternatively spliced alpha
(1G) (Ca(V)3.1) intracellular loops promote speciﬁc T-type Ca(2+) channel gating
properties. Biophys. J. 80, 1238–1250.
Chemin, J., Monteil, A., Perez-Reyes, E., Bourinet, E., Nargeot, J., Lory, P., 2002. Speciﬁc
contribution of human T-type calcium channel isotypes (alpha(1G), alpha(1H) and
alpha(1I)) to neuronal excitability. J. Physiol. 540, 3–14.
Coenen, A.M., Van Luijtelaar, E.L., 2003. Genetic animal models for absence epilepsy: a
review of the WAG/Rij strain of rats. Behav. Genet. 33, 635–655.
Coulter, D.A., Huguenard, J.R., Prince, D.A., 1989a. Characterization of ethosuximide reduction of low-threshold calcium current in thalamic neurons. Ann. Neurol. 25, 582–593.

T. Broicher et al. / Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 39 (2008) 384–399
Coulter, D.A., Huguenard, J.R., Prince, D.A., 1989b. Speciﬁc petit mal anticonvulsants
reduce calcium currents in thalamic neurons. Neurosci. Lett. 98, 74–78.
Crunelli, V., Leresche, N., 2002. Childhood absence epilepsy: genes, channels, neurons
and networks. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 371–382.
Crunelli, V., Cope, D.W., Hughes, S.W., 2006. Thalamic T-type Ca2+ channels and NREM
sleep. Cell. Calcium. 40, 175–190.
Deschenes, M., Bourassa, J., Parent, A., 1996. Striatal and cortical projections of single
neurons from the central lateral thalamic nucleus in the rat. Neuroscience 72,
679–687.
Destexhe, A., Neubig, M., Ulrich, D., Huguenard, J., 1998. Dendritic low-threshold
calcium currents in thalamic relay cells. J. Neurosci. 18, 3574–3588.
Emerick, M.C., Stein, R., Kunze, R., McNulty, M.M., Regan, M.R., Hanck, D.A., Agnew, W.S.,
2006. Proﬁling the array of Ca(v)3.1 variants from the human T-type calcium
channel gene CACNA1G: alternative structures, developmental expression, and
biophysical variations. Proteins 64, 320–342.
Fuentealba, P., Timofeev, I., Bazhenov, M., Sejnowski, T.J., Steriade, M., 2005. Membrane
bistability in thalamic reticular neurons during spindle oscillations. J. Neurophysiol.
93, 294–304.
Gutierrez, C., Cox, C.L., Rinzel, J., Sherman, S.M., 2001. Dynamics of low-threshold spike
activation in relay neurons of the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Neurosci. 21,
1022–1032.
Hernandez-Cruz, A., Pape, H.C., 1989. Identiﬁcation of two calcium currents in acutely
dissociated neurons from the rat lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Neurophysiol. 61,
1270–1283.
Hines, M.L., Carnevale, N.T., 2001. NEURON: a tool for neuroscientists. Neuroscientist 7,
123–135.
Huguenard, J.R., 1996. Low-threshold calcium currents in central nervous system
neurons. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 58, 329–348.
Kim, D., Song, I., Keum, S., Lee, T., Jeong, M.J., Kim, S.S., McEnery, M.W., Shin, H.S., 2001.
Lack of the burst ﬁring of thalamocortical relay neurons and resistance to absence
seizures in mice lacking alpha(1G) T-type Ca(2+) channels. Neuron 31, 35–45.
Kuisle, M., Wanaverbecq, N., Brewster, A.L., Frere, S.G., Pinault, D., Baram, T.Z., Luthi, A.,
2006. Functional stabilization of weakened thalamic pacemaker channel regulation
in rat absence epilepsy. J. Physiol. 575, 83–100.
Lacey, C.J., Bolam, J.P., Magill, P.J., 2007. Novel and distinct operational principles of
intralaminar thalamic neurons and their striatal projections. J. Neurosci. 27,
4374–4384.
Lee, S.H., Govindaiah, G., Cox, C.L., 2007. Heterogeneity of ﬁring properties among rat
thalamic reticular nucleus neurons. J. Physiol. 582, 195–208.
Leresche, N., Parri, H.R., Erdemli, G., Guyon, A., Turner, J.P., Williams, S.R., Asprodini, E.,
Crunelli, V., 1998. On the action of the anti-absence drug ethosuximide in the rat
and cat thalamus. J. Neurosci. 18, 4842–4853.
Lo, F.S., Ziburkus, J., Guido, W., 2002. Synaptic mechanisms regulating the
activation of a Ca(2+)-mediated plateau potential in developing relay cells of
the LGN. J. Neurophysiol. 87, 1175–1185.
Mainen, Z.F., Sejnowski, T.J., 1996. Inﬂuence of dendritic structure on ﬁring pattern in
model neocortical neurons. Nature 382, 363–366.
Meis, S., Biella, G., Pape, H.C., 1996. Interaction between low voltage-activated currents
in reticular thalamic neurons in a rat model of absence epilepsy. Eur. J. Neurosci. 8,
2090–2097.
Meuth, S.G., Kanyshkova, T., Meuth, P., Landgraf, P., Munsch, T., Ludwig, A.,
Hofmann, F., Pape, H.C., Budde, T., 2006. Membrane resting potential of
thalamocortical relay neurons is shaped by the interaction among TASK3 and
HCN2 channels. J. Neurophysiol. 96, 1517–1529.
Pape, H.C., 1996. Queer current and pacemaker: the hyperpolarization-activated cation
current in neurons. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 58, 299–327.
Pape, H.C., Budde, T., Mager, R., Kisvarday, Z.F., 1994. Prevention of Ca(2+)-mediated
action potentials in GABAergic local circuit neurones of rat thalamus by a transient
K+ current. J. Physiol. 478 (Pt 3), 403–422.
Paz, J.T., Chavez, M., Saillet, S., Deniau, J.M., Charpier, S., 2007. Activity of ventral medial
thalamic neurons during absence seizures and modulation of cortical paroxysms by
the nigrothalamic pathway. J. Neurosci. 27, 929–941.

399

Perez-Reyes, E., 2003. Molecular physiology of low-voltage-activated t-type calcium
channels. Physiol. Rev. 83, 117–161.
Perez-Reyes, E., 2006. Molecular characterization of T-type calcium channels. Cell
Calcium 40, 89–96.
Pinault, D., O'Brien, T.J., 2007. Cellular and network mechanisms of geneticallydetermined absence seizures. Thalamus & Related Systems, doi:10.1017/
S1472928807000209, 1–23.
Pinault, D., Leresche, N., Charpier, S., Deniau, J.M., Marescaux, C., Vergnes, M., Crunelli,
V., 1998. Intracellular recordings in thalamic neurones during spontaneous spike
and wave discharges in rats with absence epilepsy. J. Physiol. 509 (Pt 2), 449–456.
Seidenbecher, T., Pape, H.C., 2001. Contribution of intralaminar thalamic nuclei to spikeand-wave-discharges during spontaneous seizures in a genetic rat model of
absence epilepsy. Eur. J. Neurosci. 13, 1537–1546.
Seidenbecher, T., Staak, R., Pape, H.C., 1998. Relations between cortical and thalamic
cellular activities during absence seizures in rats. Eur. J. Neurosci. 10, 1103–1112.
Sherman, S.M., Guillery, R.W., 2006. Exploring the Thalamus and its Role in Cortical
Function. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Slaght, S.J., Leresche, N., Deniau, J.M., Crunelli, V., Charpier, S., 2002. Activity of thalamic
reticular neurons during spontaneous genetically determined spike and wave
discharges. J. Neurosci. 22, 2323–2334.
Song, I., Kim, D., Choi, S., Sun, M., Kim, Y., Shin, H.S., 2004. Role of the alpha1G T-type
calcium channel in spontaneous absence seizures in mutant mice. J. Neurosci. 24,
5249–5257.
Steriade, M., 1997. Synchronized activities of coupled oscillators in the cerebral cortex
and thalamus at different levels of vigilance. Cereb. Cortex 7, 583–604.
Talley, E.M., Cribbs, L.L., Lee, J.H., Daud, A., Perez-Reyes, E., Bayliss, D.A., 1999. Differential
distribution of three members of a gene family encoding low voltage-activated (Ttype) calcium channels. J. Neurosci. 19, 1895–1911.
Talley, E.M., Solorzano, G., Depaulis, A., Perez-Reyes, E., Bayliss, D.A., 2000. Low-voltageactivated calcium channel subunit expression in a genetic model of absence
epilepsy in the rat. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 75, 159–165.
Tennigkeit, F., Schwarz, D.W., Puil, E., 1998. Modulation of bursts and highthreshold calcium spikes in neurons of rat auditory thalamus. Neuroscience 83,
1063–1073.
Tsakiridou, E., Bertollini, L., de Curtis, M., Avanzini, G., Pape, H.C., 1995. Selective increase
in T-type calcium conductance of reticular thalamic neurons in a rat model of
absence epilepsy. J. Neurosci. 15, 3110–3117.
Van der Werf, Y.D., Witter, M.P., Groenewegen, H.J., 2002. The intralaminar and midline
nuclei of the thalamus. Anatomical and functional evidence for participation in
processes of arousal and awareness. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 39, 107–140.
van Ooyen, A., Duijnhouwer, J., Remme, M.W., van Pelt, J., 2002. The effect of dendritic
topology on ﬁring patterns in model neurons. Network 13, 311–325.
Williams, D., 1953. A study of thalamic and cortical rhythms in petit mal. Brain 76,
50–69.
Williams, S.R., Stuart, G.J., 2000. Action potential backpropagation and somatodendritic distribution of ion channels in thalamocortical neurons. J. Neurosci. 20,
1307–1317.
Yasukawa, T., Kita, T., Xue, Y., Kita, H., 2004. Rat intralaminar thalamic nuclei
projections to the globus pallidus: a biotinylated dextran amine anterograde
tracing study. J. Comp. Neurol. 471, 153–167.
Ying, S.W., Abbas, S.Y., Harrison, N.L., Goldstein, P.A., 2006. Propofol block of I(h)
contributes to the suppression of neuronal excitability and rhythmic burst ﬁring in
thalamocortical neurons. Eur. J. Neurosci. 23, 465–480.
Zhan, X.J., Cox, C.L., Rinzel, J., Sherman, S.M., 1999. Current clamp and modeling
studies of low-threshold calcium spikes in cells of the cat's lateral geniculate
nucleus. J. Neurophysiol. 81, 2360–2373.
Zhang, Y., Mori, M., Burgess, D.L., Noebels, J.L., 2002. Mutations in high-voltageactivated calcium channel genes stimulate low-voltage-activated currents in mouse
thalamic relay neurons. J. Neurosci. 22, 6362–6371.
Zhang, Y., Vilaythong, A.P., Yoshor, D., Noebels, J.L., 2004. Elevated thalamic low-voltageactivated currents precede the onset of absence epilepsy in the SNAP25-deﬁcient
mouse mutant coloboma. J. Neurosci. 24, 5239–5248.

