Perspectives
Guidelines

Petilla terminology: nomenclature of
features of GABAergic interneurons
of the cerebral cortex
The Petilla Interneuron Nomenclature Group (PING)*

Abstract | Neuroscience produces a vast amount of data from an enormous diversity
of neurons. A neuronal classification system is essential to organize such data and
the knowledge that is derived from them. Classification depends on the
unequivocal identification of the features that distinguish one type of neuron from
another. The problems inherent in this are particularly acute when studying cortical
interneurons. To tackle this, we convened a representative group of researchers to
agree on a set of terms to describe the anatomical, physiological and molecular
features of GABAergic interneurons of the cerebral cortex. The resulting
terminology might provide a stepping stone towards a future classification of these
complex and heterogeneous cells. Consistent adoption will be important for the
success of such an initiative, and we also encourage the active involvement of
the broader scientific community in the dynamic evolution of this project.
The GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid)-ergic
interneurons of the cerebral cortex are a
diverse population of cells. Their diversity is
manifested in every aspect of their phenotype,
as evidenced by their different morphological,
electrophysiological and neurochemical features. It has long been assumed that neocortical interneurons belong to different classes1,
with the variability in their features within a
class being much smaller than the differences
across classes. We are convinced that the differences between the classes are indeed real
and functionally relevant. Thus, identifying
classes and subclasses of interneurons is an
important step towards understanding how
inhibition shapes cortical function.
How to classify neocortical interneurons
has been a topic of debate for some time.
Nevertheless, classification criteria often
seem to be arbitrarily chosen, and the
nomenclature that is used to describe their
features often varies. Consequently, communication among investigators can suffer. Not
only do the different terminologies make
comparisons of the findings of different

studies difficult, they can even obscure the
value of the inquiry.
Cortical interneurons are typically
described and classified according to various
morphological, molecular and physiological
features. Ideally the characterization of a
neuron will consider all three sets of criteria,
but as neurons do not have an autonomous
morphology, molecular biology, or physiology, these multidimensional features are
merely probed by specific detection methods. Each investigator might select a particular method to characterize a cell, but there is
only one unitary reality behind it all.

Several classification schemes for cortical
interneurons have been proposed. Cajal
termed these cells “short-axon” neurons2 and
distinguished between them on the basis
of the morphologies that were revealed by
Golgi staining. Lorente de Nó subsequently
described dozens of types of short-axon cells
in the mouse neocortex3, and similar Golgibased classification ensued for more than
half a century 4–6. Novel labelling methods,
such as the use of intracellular horseradish
peroxidase (HRP), revealed axonal arbors
more completely and led to new efforts to
classify interneurons morphologically1,7.
The establishment of electrophysiological
criteria has resulted in several additional
classification attempts1,8–10. Finally, molecular and genetic markers have also been used
as bases for classification11–13. These classifications are not always compatible, and
interneuron researchers often face problems
in describing the cellular subtypes that they
investigate.
To aid ongoing efforts towards interneuron classification, to facilitate the exchange
of information and to build a foundation for
future progress in the field, we propose and
publicly endorse a standardized nomenclature of interneuron properties. This proposal
arose out of a meeting devoted to this topic
in Cajal’s native town, Petilla de Aragón
(Navarra, Spain), and is rooted in the collective work that has been performed in many
laboratories. We seek agreement on a list of
the essential features that differentiate the
GABAergic interneurons of the neocortex,
and encourage all investigators to use the
same terms to describe the same features.
We hope that this first step will later lead to
a broadly adopted classification. However,
before we are able to speak a common
language, we need to agree on the words.

Box 1 | The Petilla Interneuron Nomenclature Group (PING)
PING consists of: Giorgio A. Ascoli, Lidia Alonso-Nanclares, Stewart A. Anderson, German
Barrionuevo, Ruth Benavides-Piccione, Andreas Burkhalter, György Buzsáki, Bruno Cauli, Javier
DeFelipe, Alfonso Fairén, Dirk Feldmeyer, Gord Fishell, Yves Fregnac, Tamas F. Freund, Daniel
Gardner, Esther P. Gardner, Jesse H. Goldberg, Moritz Helmstaedter, Shaul Hestrin, Fuyuki Karube,
Zoltán F. Kisvárday, Bertrand Lambolez, David A. Lewis, Oscar Marin, Henry Markram, Alberto
Muñoz, Adam Packer, Carl C. H. Petersen, Kathleen S. Rockland, Jean Rossier, Bernardo Rudy, Peter
Somogyi, Jochen F. Staiger, Gabor Tamas, Alex M. Thomson, Maria Toledo-Rodriguez, Yun Wang,
David C. West and Rafael Yuste.

nature reviews | neuroscience	

volume 9 | july 2008 | 557
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Perspectives
Our terminology is dynamic. The associated online supplementary material includes
the complete terminology as it stands
at the time of manuscript submission. Links
to the nomenclature that was originally
agreed upon in Petilla and the most upto-date version as it matures are provided
in the Further Information. A committee
will update this nomenclature as needed.
Continuous feedback, constructive criticism
and suggestions are invited from the whole
scientific community.
Overview of interneuronal features
Even the meaning of terms such as
‘interneuron’ and ‘cortex’ can be sources
of debate. This Perspective focuses on the
GABAergic cells (both local and projection
neurons) of the cerebral cortex, including
the neo‑, the archi‑ and the paleo-cortex.
A PubMed search using the query ‘cortex
interneuron’ returns more than 200 reviews
in the past 40 years, ranging from early functional overviews14 to recent specifications of
developmental origins15. Most approaches
make use of one or more of three essential
types of characteristics: morphological,
molecular and physiological. We have
therefore structured the terminology of the
features according to this broad division.
The sequence in which these three categories
of features are presented does not convey an
order of priority. However, each domain is
internally ordered in a logically hierarchical
fashion. Only the first levels of this organization are illustrated and discussed here. The
finer details are included in Supplementary
information S2 (box), S3 (box) and S4 (box)
and on the Petilla Terminology website.
Some terms are self-explanatory or widely
agreed and do not require further elaboration. Others, which are either less common
or more controversial, are given further
explanation.
When used in a scientific document,
some terms referring to quantitative features
would require the explicit provision of
definite numerical criteria. However, such
criteria will vary depending on the specific
scientific questions and particular lines of
investigation. Thus, we refrain from suggesting precise borders between different
anatomical attributes, chemical content or
electrical activities, leaving this choice as the
purview of individual researchers. We recognize the difficulties of comparing morphology or biophysics across laboratories without
quantitative guidelines. However, we hope
that the future use of this nomenclature for
these features will always be accompanied by
their quantification, and we envision that the

numerical criteria that are needed to distinguish among the different classes of neurons
will become clearer with time. It is important
to agree on a common terminology when
referring to the same features before
comparative measurements are attempted.
Although some traditional terms for
cortical interneurons (such as basket cells
and chandelier cells) are used here for ease of
reference and illustration, the nomenclature
proposed does not attempt to give names to
different classes of interneurons; instead, it
defines the features that can be used for their
identification. In the following brief description of some of these key features, the actual
terms used in the nomenclature are given in
quotation marks.

the axon, and their electrical and chemical
synaptic connections. Each component
is associated with a set of features (Box 2;
Supplementary information S2).

Morphological features
The main structural components of
interneurons are the soma, the dendrites,

Dendrites. The morphology of dendritic
trees is often simpler in cortical interneurons
than in principal cells. Moreover, dendrites

Somata. The shape, size and orientation
of somata vary greatly. Qualitative shape
descriptors (such as ‘round’, ‘fusiform’,
‘triangular’ and ‘polygonal’) are illustrated
in FIG. 1 and Supplementary information S5
(figure). Somata typically vary in diameter
from 10–30 µm, although more extreme
values have been reported. The main axis
of somata can be perpendicular (‘radial’) or
parallel (‘tangential’) to the pial surface in
the coronal plane (or, in the hippocampus,
to the cellular layer in the transverse plane).

Box 2 | Summary of morphological, molecular and physiological features
Morphological features
• Soma: shape; size; orientation; other
• Dendrite: arborization polarity; branch metrics; fine structure; postsynaptic element; other
• Axon: initial segment; arbor trajectory; terminal shape; branch metrics; boutons; synaptic targets;
other
• Connections: chemical and electrical; source; location and distribution; other
Molecular features
• Transcription factors
• Neurotransmitters or their synthesizing enzymes
• Neuropeptides
• Calcium-binding proteins
• Receptors: ionotropic; metabotropic
• Structural proteins
• Cell-surface markers
• Ion-channels
• Connexins
• Transporters: plasma membrane; vesicular
• Others
Physiological features
• Passive or subthreshold parameters: resting membrane potential; membrane time constants; input
resistance; oscillation and resonance; rheobase and chronaxie; rectification
• Action potential (AP) measurements: amplitude; threshold; half-width; afterhyperpolarization;
afterdepolarization; changes in AP waveform during train.
• Dendritic backpropagation
• Depolarizing plateaus
• Firing pattern: oscillatory and resonant behaviour; onset response to depolarizing step; steadystate response to depolarizing step
• Response to hyperpolarizing step: rectification; rebound
• Spiking recorded extracellularly: phase relationship to oscillations; functional response specificity;
cross-correlation and other dynamics
• Postsynaptic responses: spontaneous and evoked; ratio of receptor subtypes; spatial and temporal
summation; short- and long-term plasticity; gap junctions

558 | july 2008 | volume 9	

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Perspectives
are typically less elaborate and easier to
visualize than axons and thus provide a
practical source of morphological features.
The polarity of the dendritic arborization16
can be described (FIG. 1a–h; Supplementary
information S5). ‘Unipolar’, ‘bipolar’ and
‘multipolar’ cells have one, two or multiple
long primary dendrites, respectively, extending from their cell body17,18. ‘Bitufted’ cells
have two clusters of branches that originate
directly from the soma and extend in
opposite directions19. In any interneuron
with bidirectional dendrites (be it bipolar
or bitufted), the two arbors can extend in
radial or tangential directions. In addition
to other, shorter dendrites, some interneurons have one thick primary dendrite that
resembles that of pyramidal cells. There are
also interneurons that have a single dendritic
tuft. In addition, some dendrites are confined to specific cortical laminae or columns
(‘intralaminar’ and ‘intracolumnar’ dendrites), whereas others are not (‘interlaminar’ and ‘intercolumnar’ dendrites). Somatic
shape is to a great extent determined by
the number and orientation of the primary
dendrites; thus, these two sets of features are
not independent.
Dendritic branching metrics (FIG. 2)
are routinely analysed automatically20.
‘Frequency’ (the ‘number’ or ‘distribution’ of
branches, bifurcations and terminals) and
‘size’ (branch diameter, length or surface
area) are commonly provided. Other related
measurements include the change of
diameter along the branch (‘taper’) and at
the bifurcations, which can be captured by the
‘power relation’ (Ref. 21). ‘Sholl analysis’ measures the number of times that the dendrite
intersects a series of consecutive concentric
circles22,23. Several variants of this analysis
also exist: for example, the percent length of
process measured against its distance along
the dendritic path. The ‘fractal dimension’
measures a one-dimensional dendrite’s ability
to fill a two- or three-dimensional space at
finer and finer resolutions, quantifying an
important aspect of spatial occupancy24. A
related characteristic, ‘tortuosity’, describes
dendritic meandering and is captured by the
ratio between the straight and the path (along
the dendrite) distances between the two ends
of the branch25. ‘Partition asymmetry’ analyses the imbalance between the subtrees that
stem from a branch in terms of the number
of their terminal tips26, and various angles
can be used to report the local threedimensional spatial features.
On a finer scale, dendritic spines and
beads can be considered (FIG. 1i–k). Dendritic
beads are focal swellings that typically

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

i

j

k

Figure 1 | Somatic and dendritic morphology: shape and fine structure. Human cerebral cortex
Nature
Neuroscience
sections stained by NADPH-diaphorase histochemistry reveal key features
ofReviews
somatic| and
dendritic
morphology. a–h | Examples of soma shape and dendritic arborization polarity. Somata can be fusiform
(a–c), polygonal (d), round (g), triangular (h) or shapes that are not described by any of these terms (e,f).
Dendritic arborization can be termed monopolar (a), bitufted (b), bipolar (c) or multipolar (d).
i–k | Higher-magnification images showing structural details of the dendrites. Dendrites can be fairly
regular and aspiny (i), irregular and spiny (j; arrows indicate spines) or beaded and aspiny (k; arrows
indicate beads). Scale bars: a–d (shown in d): 50 µm; e–h (shown in f): 20 µm; i–k (shown in k): 10 µm.
Images supplied by Javier DeFelipe.

contain mitochondria. Many interneurons
are spiny early in their development but
lose most of their spines as they mature;
thus, age should be specified. The total
number, density, distribution and shape of
spines or beads on the dendrites all vary.
These fine structures might have important
computational significance. There can also
be other structures, such as filopodia. The

synaptic inputs that a cell receives on its
dendrites also distinguish it from other cell
types. ‘Asymmetric’, or Type I, inputs are
mostly glutamatergic and excitatory, whereas
‘symmetric’, or Type II, inputs are mostly
GABAergic and inhibitory27–29. How densely
the inputs are distributed, where they make
contact and where they come from are also
all important features30.

nature reviews | neuroscience	

volume 9 | july 2008 | 559
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Perspectives
Definition or units

Frequency

Number of branch-points
per unit length

Thickness

Micrometres

Taper

Percentage narrowing per
unit distance

Angle

Bifurcation amplitude

Tortuosity

Ratio of the distances
between the branch endpoints measured as a straight
line and along the path

Partition
asymmetry

Ratio of the absolute
difference and the sum of the
numbers of bifurcations in
the two daughter subtrees of
a branch-point

Fractal
dimension

1 – S, where S is the slope
of the line in the plot of
log (length) versus log
(resolvable size)

Diameter
power
relation

High values

Log
(resolvable size)

Number of intersections
plotted against the distance
from the soma
Number of
intersections

Sholl
analysis

Log (length)

Low values

Metric

Distance
from soma

(Diameter of parent branch)3/2
of
Σ ( Diameter
child branches )

3/2

Figure 2 | Basic morphological features that describe neuronal branching. Dendritic and
axonal processes can be quantified with many different metrics. These Nature
measurements
illustrated
Reviews |are
Neuroscience
schematically to show the properties of the complex structures that can be captured. Representative
exemplars of branches that would give increasing numerical values are shown for each metric.
Although some metrics can be understood with little explanation (such as taper), others are not
immediately intuitive and must be defined mathematically (such as fractal dimension). Sholl analysis
yields a plot rather than a single value. In some cases, cortical interneurons can be distinguished from
pyramidal cells and from each other using a combination of these metrics. Images supplied by
Adam Packer.

Axons. Axons are the major determinant
of connectivity (Supplementary information S6 (figure)), and their morphological
features have traditionally been used as the
principal classification criteria2,3,5. Moreover,
axonal morphologies are strongly correlated
with both the developmental origin of
neocortical interneurons31 and their synaptic
physiology32. However, rigorously defining
quantitative differences between distinct
axonal morphologies remains a difficult and
open problem.
The axon originates either from the soma
or from a primary dendrite and typically has
a distinct (short, thin and smooth) initial

segment (defined as the portion of the axon
that contains a high density of Na+ channels
and electron-microscopically recognized
plasma-membrane undercoating and fasciculated microtubules). The first bifurcation
or collateral can arise at a variable distance
from the soma, and this distance should be
recorded. Axons can be restricted to their
region or layer of origin and can have major
branches that travel long distances horizontally. Alternatively, they can course preferentially into deeper cortical layers (‘descending’
towards the white matter) or to more superficial layers (‘ascending’ towards the pial surface). Some axons ascend and descend, and

thus form an arch before arborization begins
(‘willow axons’). Other axonal arbors (of
so-called long-range interneurons) can cover
multiple layers and cortical regions33–35.
Unfortunately, there is little data about such
long-distance GABAergic projections in the
cerebral cortex36–38.
The description of axonal arbors shares
some terminology with that of dendrites, but
there are also some important differences.
In principle, similar branching metrics can
be applied. However, unlike most dendrites,
some axons are ‘myelinated’. Axon diameter can vary along the length of the axon:
broad and myelinated portions alternate
with unmyelinated and slender portions.
Other axons are unmyelinated and more
consistently slender or tapering. A complete
description of axonal geometry should
therefore include analysis of the relationships
between branching patterns, axonal diameters and myelination patterns. The density
of axonal arbors as well as their projection
pattern (‘radial/oblique’ or ‘tangential’) can
be described. Some axons are confined to
specific lamina or columns (‘intralaminar’
and ‘intracolumnar’ axons), whereas others
are not (‘interlaminar’ and ‘intercolumnar’
axons). Certain patterns of axonal arborization have been assigned specific designations.
For example, a plexus of highly branched
axons is shown in FIG. 3A. A distinctive pattern of arborization is demonstrated by the
type of interneurons that are usually found in
neocortical layers 2 and 3 and that have historically been referred to as double-bouquet
cells (FIG. 3B; Supplementary information S6).
In addition to a dense local plexus in the
layer of origin39, these interneurons have
bundles of long vertical branches that
resemble horsetails40–42 and descend to all
deeper layers5,43 to predominantly innervate
dendritic spines and shafts2,44. The terminal
branches of some axons can be ‘curved’,
‘straight’ or ‘clustered’. The terms curved and
straight refer to whether or not the terminal
or preterminal branches bend as they
approach their target cell(s). Some basket
cells (FIG. 3C; Supplementary information S6)
provide a clear example of the former case,
whereas chandelier or axo-axonic cells
exemplify the straight phenotype. Clustered
terminals are densely grouped together, as in
chandelier cell axons.
Not all GABAergic synapses are associated with axonal boutons. Nevertheless,
when boutons are present, they can vary
in several respects (FIG. 3D,E). Their ‘size’
and ‘density’ can be quantified, as can
their clustering patterns (or distribution)45.
Boutons can exhibit a particular structure46,

560 | july 2008 | volume 9	

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Perspectives
such as ‘terminal’ or ‘en passant’, or can be
connected by thin stalks or twigs. Electron
microscopy can reveal important ultrastructural characteristics, such as the density and
type of vesicles that are present in or near
the pre­synaptic terminal, the specific type of
synapse, the presence and density of mitochondria in the bouton47 and the number of
synapses per bouton.
Connections. The postsynaptic target (be
it a pyramidal cell, an interneuron, a glial
cell or a component of the vascular system)
links the function of an interneuron and
the spatial characteristics of its axon. The
location of the synapse on the target cell
should be identified: are contacts made on
the soma, the dendrites (in which case the
description should include the order and the
distance from the soma) and/or the axon, and
are they restricted to specific regions of the
dendritic tree (for example, the basal or apical
dendrites, the main apical trunk or the
apical oblique dendrites)? Furthermore,
the proportion of contacts made on to
dendritic spines versus dendritic shafts can
vary considerably. The final pattern of postsynaptic contacts might present recognizable
features. ‘Distributed’ patterns are evenly
spaced, whereas in a ‘gradient’ pattern the
distribution of contacts changes in a specific
direction. ‘Clustered’ terminal branches are
often seen in chandelier or axo-axonic cells
that innervate pyramidal-cell axon initial
segments48. Noticeably, these cells also have
such clusters as en passant formations49. The
general degree of postsynaptic specificity of
GABAergic interneurons, and how it affects
cortical microcircuitry, is still debated50.
Cortical interneurons can be coupled
electrically through gap junctions51,52. These
connections are found in the membranes
of somata, dendrites and axons. Their location and distance from the soma can vary53.
The distribution of gap junctions can be
expressed as the total number and density
of contacts and/or the probability that the
interneuron of interest will make contact
with its neighbouring cells54. If possible, the
identity of the connected neurons should
also be noted. Finally, neurotransmitters can
diffuse upon release and act on other synaptic contacts or on extrasynaptic receptors55,56.
Obtaining these data requires difficult
experiments, but the available information
in this regard should also be noted.
Molecular features
In contrast to morphological features, the
definition of the molecular features of an
interneuron is often unambiguous. Some

1

A

B

D

100 µm

10 µm

1

2/3
2/3
100 µm
4
5
4

6

d
d

a3

C

a3

500 µm
PIA

ax
a5

2/3

d
*

D

Ee

ax

d

a3
ax
a2
a1 Ea

a2

Eb

d
a2
d

Ed

M
d
d
4

5/6

WM

a1

a1

Ec

Figure 3 | Axonal morphology and synaptic structure. a | An example of a dense plexus of highly
branched axons: a neurogliaform cell in the rat somatosensory cortex. The soma and dendrites are
Nature
| Neuroscience
shown in black and the axon is shown in red. b | A double-bouquet cell
from Reviews
the cat primary
visual
cortex. The soma and dendrites are shown in red and the axon is shown in black. Note the characteristic horsetail-like axonal distribution. c | Morphological characteristics of a layer-3 large basket cell
from the cat primary visual cortex. In this three-dimensional computer reconstruction, the soma and
dendrites are shown in red and the axon is shown in black. The axon arborized profusely in the lower
half of layer 3 (black boutons) and had a lateral extent of 1.1 mm from the parent soma (indicated by
the asterisk). In addition, two axon collaterals descended into layers 5 and upper 6, each of which
provided a small tuft (dark gray boutons). In layer 4, only a few boutons (light gray) were found. The
total length of the axon was 44.053 mm, and it had 5,373 boutons. Typically, large basket cell boutons
establish multiple axo-somatic contacts on other neurons. d | Fine structure of an axon revealed in a
photomicrograph, showing terminal boutons (indicated by arrow heads) and boutons en passant
(indicated by arrows). The image was obtained by staining a section of human cerebral cortex using
NADPH-diaphorase histochemistry. e | Correlated light and electron microscopy of autapses.
ea | A myelinated axonal branch (labelled ‘ax’) gives rise to six terminal boutons (four of which, a1, a2,
a3 and a5, are labelled) that are apposed to the dendrite (labelled ‘d’). Eb | Three of the terminal boutons shown in ea emerge from the myelinated axonal trunk (ax) and establish synapses (indicated by
the arrows) on successive dendritic beads, as illustrated at higher magnification in Ec-e. Scale bars:
Ea: 10 µm; Eb: 1 µm; Ec-e (shown in Ec): 0.3 µm. D, dorsal; M, medial; PIA, pia mater; WM, white matter.
Part A modified, with permission, from REF. 108  (2003) American Association for the Advancement
of Science. Part B reproduced, with permission, from REF. 39  (1998) Society for Neuroscience.
Part C courtesy of Alex S. Ferecskó. Part D  supplied by Javier DeFelipe. Part E reproduced, with
permission, from REF. 46  (1997) Society for Neuroscience.

nature reviews | neuroscience	

volume 9 | july 2008 | 561
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Perspectives
widely used molecular markers are listed in
Box 2 and in Supplementary information
S3.The number of molecular features that
could be measured or characterized is obviously enormous and is also rapidly expanding as our knowledge grows. Nevertheless,
several families of molecules seem to be
particularly important for distinguishing
different types of neurons, and cortical
interneurons in particular, from each other.
We have thus grouped these molecules into
categories: transcription factors, neurotransmitters or their synthesizing enzymes,
neuropeptides, Ca2+-binding proteins, neuro­
transmitter receptors, structural proteins,
ion channels, connexins, pannexins and
membrane transporters. Several prominent
members of each group are listed. However,
hundreds of molecules might be of interest,
and gene expression profiles, which can be
generated quickly, are gaining prominence
in specifying the molecules of interest in a
given interneuron population11,57.
Given how quickly this field is moving, one could argue that it might be
disadvantageous to put too much emphasis
on the molecular analysis of interneuron
phenotypes at this early stage. Moreover,
even ostensibly similar interneurons (from
the biochemical point of view) can be distinguished on the basis of the layer-specific
combination of inputs that they receive and
on the different regions of postsynaptic cell
that they target. However, each day more and
more site-specific neurochemical information becomes available58, and considerable
effort is focused on investigating the entire
genome of single cells59 or populations of
identical cells60. In the future, it is therefore
likely that these molecular features will
be a powerful tool in the classification of
interneurons, along with information from
studies of the functional and structural
features of individual cells and their connections. For example, on the basis of
immunocytochemistry, chandelier cells can
be chemically defined as GABAergic cells
that contain the Ca2+-binding proteins parvalbumin and calbindin but not calretinin,
and that might also contain the neuropeptide
corticotropin-releasing factor but not other
neuropeptides61, namely cholecystokinin,
somatostatin, neuropeptide Y, vasoactive
intestinal polypeptide and tachykinins. It is
also important to recognize that such phenotypes change during development and,
quantitatively at least, can be altered plastically.
Physiological and biophysical features
The electrophysiological characteristics of a
neuronal population are important in

determining what part those cells play in circuit activity and computation. To an extent,
neocortical interneurons can be differentiated on the basis of these features alone.
However, although some electrophysio­
logical characteristics correlate well with
other features, other characteristics do not,
and unambiguous identification requires
the assessment of other dimensions (see the
example in Supplementary information S7
(figure)). Interneurons possess passive
properties as well as those that are revealed
by stimulation with injections of current.
Some spiking information (such as ‘firing
frequency’) can also be revealed by extracellular recordings. Postsynaptic responses to
stimulation vary in both their time course
and the dynamics of transmitter release
(Box 2; Supplementary information S4).
When characterizing the electrophysio­logical
properties of cortical interneurons, the
advantages and limitations of every technique should be considered. For example,
whole-cell patch electrodes are commonly
used to record intracellularly, particularly in
slice preparations. Although this technique
provides stable electrical access to the neuron, it also dializes the neuron’s intracellular
milieu, thus potentially altering the response
properties of the cell that are modulated or
controlled by its intracellular biochemistry.
By contrast, sharp-electrode recordings are
thought to affect this intracellular biochemistry less, but often do not provide the stability
and electrical access of patch electrodes.
Passive and subthreshold properties. The
first three measurable passive properties
described in the nomenclature are electrical.
The ‘membrane potential’, which is usually
given in millivolts (mV), reflects the potential difference across the membrane given
specific experimental conditions, which
should be precisely defined. The membrane
potential can resonate or oscillate at a characteristic frequency, particularly when it is
close to the firing threshold62–64, which might
be related to its function in the circuit49,65.
The membrane ‘time constant’, which
quantifies the exponential temporal decay
of a voltage perturbation, depends on the
‘membrane resistance’ and the ‘membrane
capacitance’. The ‘input resistance’ reflects
(from an operational point of view) the
aggregate electrical resistance of the entire cell
(not just the membrane) to current injected
through the electrode. A cell’s subthreshold
features are its features during the condition
in which any stimulus that is being applied
does not cause the cell to fire. The ‘rheobase’
is defined as the minimal electrical current

(of infinite duration) that is required to bring
the cell to its action-potential threshold. The
‘chronaxie’ is the duration of the briefest
current of twice the rheobase amplitude that
can cause firing.
Action-potential measurements. Action
potentials have various definable characteristics, including the threshold voltage
at which the spike is triggered, as well as
the spike amplitude and the half-width.
Spike ‘afterhyperpolarizations’ (AHPs) and
‘afterdepolarizations’ (ADPs) are transient
changes in membrane potential that follow
the action potential (FIG. 4a): they can be simple and close to mono-phasic in shape or can
be complex. These waveform characteristics
can change during the course of a train of
action potentials. If information is available
on whether or not backpropagation of the
action potential into the dendritic tree from
the soma can occur, this should be noted66.
Firing pattern. Interneurons exhibit a wide
diversity of spontaneous and evoked firing
patterns67. Depolarizing current steps are
often used to uncover a cell’s stereotypical
response. The response at the onset of a
constant somatic depolarizion might or
might not resemble the steady-state response
(the firing pattern that is observed after
an extended current injection)8. The term
‘continuous’ refers to a pattern in which
steady-state behaviour is similar to onset
behaviour (FIG. 5). An ‘onset burst’ is a train of
action potentials that occurs at the beginning
of a stimulus and has a shorter ‘interspike
interval’ (ISI) than the steady-state trains
of spikes. Although the term ‘burst’ is often
used simply to indicate higher-frequency
firing at the start of a response and/or strong
adaptation following the onset, it is also useful to distinguish this from bursts that ride
on a depolarizing wave and are nearly identical every time. However, as yet there is no
agreement on the terms that should be used
to distinguish between these two types of
burst. In a ‘delayed onset’ neuron, even when
a suprathreshold current is injected, the
membrane does not reach the firing threshold until after the moment that would be
predicted from the time constant (FIG. 5). In
some cells a single spike can be triggered at
the onset and firing can cease for an interval
before the steady-state behaviour begins.
Other onset behaviour is possible as well.
Steady-state responses to depolarizing
current steps are characterized by different
firing patterns. ‘Amplitude accommodation’
is the decrease in amplitude of the action
potentials that occurs during a train. ‘Spike

562 | july 2008 | volume 9	

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Perspectives
b

20 ms

100 pA

10 mV

20 mV

a

400 pA

frequency adaptation’ (FIG. 5; Supplementary
information S8 (figure)) is the decrease in
firing frequency that occurs during sustained firing. The maximal sustained firing
frequency is called the ‘saturating frequency’.
The minimal constantly maintained firing
rate is the ‘continuous frequency’. The ‘I‑f
curve’ is the relationship between the firing
frequency (f) and the amount of current
injected (I). ‘AHP accommodation’ is the
change in the amplitude and/or shape of
the spike AHP that occurs during sustained
firing. Another type of AHP results from a
cumulative and/or voltage-dependent current, which can be particularly slow after a
current step.
Even at steady state, the ISI can vary.
Action-potential discharges with a broad ISI
distribution, denoted ‘variable’ discharges,
are commonly termed ‘irregular spiking’
(FIG. 5). Some interneurons display a ‘stuttering’ (sometimes called interrupting) pattern,
in which pairs or brief trains of spikes with
short and nearly constant ISIs alternate
with longer periods of silence (FIG. 5).
‘Fast‑spiking’ cells (FIG. 5; Supplementary
information S9 (figure)) fire at a continuous
(but not necessarily constant) high frequency
(greater than 50 Hz, which is often considerably higher than the firing rates of principal
cells). These interneurons commonly display
a brief action potential with a deep, fast AHP.
In healthy adult tissue, many of these cells
have subthreshold oscillations. Differences
in the degree of spike frequency adaptation (expressed as an adaptation ratio for
individual cells68) can be used to distinguish
between broad anatomical and physiological classes of interneurons (Supplementary
information S8). ‘Silent cells’, as their name
implies, exhibit no action potentials, although
the existence of these cells is debated. Other
firing patterns are also possible.
The pattern of spiking changes in response
to different current injections. Specifically,
the firing behaviour that results when a small
current is injected so that the membrane
potential stays near the threshold level can
differ from that which is observed with strong
current injections. For example, some fastspiking cells produce near-threshold highfrequency discharges in a stuttering pattern.
By contrast, at stronger current injections
these cells produce continuous rhythmic
spiking. However, the near-threshold pattern
varies with cortical area and layer, and the
stuttering behaviour is not seen in all cortical
locations. Researchers should specify the
current that was injected. Furthermore, firing patterns change with maturation, so the
age of the animal should be documented.

500 ms

c

d

e

f

Figure 4 | Functional characterization of interneurons. a,b | Electrophysiological protocols used
Naturecurrent
Reviewsinjection
| Neuroscience
to measure neurons’ afterhyperpolarization (AHP) and sag responses. Somatic
(bottom trace in both plots) and recorded membrane voltage (top traces) reveal an AHP ( a) and a sag
response (b)109. c-f | Diverse interneuron subclasses translate distinct patterns of activity into unique
Ca2+ signals. The warmth of the colour reflects the magnitude of the Ca2+ accumulations. Axon terminals (indicated by the small black arrows) are positioned adjacent to dendrites to illustrate the
spatial arrangement of synaptic activation, which can be in clusters or alone. c | A schematic of dendritic Ca2+ dynamics during a single action potential (left), a subthreshold excitatory postsynaptic
potential (EPSP) (centre) and EPSP/action-potential coupling (right) in the dendrites of a multipolar
perisoma-targeting fast-spiking cell from neocortical layer 2/3. Note that Ca2+ influx during single
action potentials is proximally restricted. During subthreshold synaptic activation, convergent inputs
activate dendritic subunits whereas individual inputs cause microdomains of Ca2+ accumulation.
During EPSP/action-potential coupling, spikes propagate specifically to synaptically activated synaptic compartments where IA currents are inactivated. d | A schematic of a neocortical layer-2/3
calretinin-positive irregular-spiking interneuron stimulated as in c. The Ca2+ dynamics of bipolar
irregular-spiking cells resemble fast-spiking cells, except that they lack Ca 2+ microdomains.
e | Dendritic Ca2+ signals in a layer-2/3 bitufted cell during action-potential backpropagation (left)
and repetitive subthreshold (centre) and suprathreshold (right) activation of a single synapse. The
multiple arrowheads on the individual schematic axonal terminals represent repetitive activation of
a single synapse. f | Dendritic Ca2+ signals in a layer-5 rebound-spiking dendrite-targeting interneuron. In burst mode (left), synaptic activation (top trace) or somatic current injection (bottom trace)
generates rebound spikes and highest Ca2+ signals at distal dendrites, where low-voltage-activated
Ca2+ channels are clustered. In tonic mode (right), globally propagating Na+-based action potentials
triggered either synaptically (top trace) or by somatic current injection (bottom trace) cause uniform
Ca2+ accumulations. Excitation that is subthreshold for rebound-spike or action-potential generation
does not cause Ca2+ influx (centre). Parts a and b reproduced from REF. 109. Parts c-f reproduced, with
permission, from REF. 110  (2005) Elsevier Science.

nature reviews | neuroscience	

volume 9 | july 2008 | 563
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Perspectives
Burst
Fast spiking

Continuous

Delayed

Stuttering

20 mV
500 msec

Non-adapting,
non-fast spiking

Adapting

Irregular spiking

Intrinsic burst
firing

30 mV
400 ms

Accelerating

20 mV

200 ms

Figure 5 | Petilla terminology: types of firing patterns. Cortical GABAergic
interneurons
display
Nature Reviews
| Neuroscience
a vast repertoire of discharge responses. These samples are representative of the most common
responses to standardized intrasomatic step-current injections in the rat neocortex. The features
of firing patterns in response to step-onset, organized in columns, include bursts, delays and continuous firing, which is neither burst nor delayed. Steady-state patterns, displayed in rows, can be fast
spiking, non-adapting non-fast spiking, adapting, irregular spiking, intrinsic burst firing or accelerating.
Fast spiking neurons can also display a stuttering or ‘Morse-code-like’ discharge that is characterized
by high-frequency spike clusters that are intermingled with unpredictable periods of silence for a wide
range of long, sustained, somatic-current injections. Blank areas of the table and boxes containing
only scale bars correspond to firing patterns that have not yet been characterized in neocortical
interneurons. The scale bar at the top left refers to the traces in the first four rows; the scale bars in the
fifth and sixth rows refers to the traces in the fifth and sixth rows, respectively.

Characteristic responses to hyperpolarizing steps are described by the rectification
and rebound behaviour. The differences
between the voltages at the onset of the step
and during steady state is defined as the ‘sag’
(FIG. 4b). At the end of a hyperpolarizing step,
a depolarizing hump or rebound can appear,
which might or might not initiate firing.
For example, in burst-firing cells a brief
stereotypical high-frequency burst of action
potentials is initiated on rebound.
Postsynaptic responses. Interneurons can
also be characterized on the basis of their
responses to excitatory or inhibitory synaptic input, which can be ‘spontaneous’ or
‘evoked’ by the stimulation of an identified
presynaptic cell. The frequency of spontaneous events and the probability of evoking a
response upon presynaptic stimulation are
highly sensitive to the exact experimental

conditions. The properties of the postsynaptic responses of cortical interneurons vary
over a wide range69. For example, their ‘rise
time’, ‘amplitude’, ‘decay’ (or width at half
amplitude), ‘reversal potential’, ‘charge’ and
complement of ‘receptors’ that underlie the
synaptic current67 can differ. The GABAA
receptors that mediate the outputs of
interneurons also differ across subtypes70.
The ratio of the different receptor subtypes
that mediate a combined synaptic current
is often of interest. ‘Spatial summation’ and
‘temporal summation’ occur across a cell to
differing extents.
Many types of plasticity can occur at
the synaptic level. This document does not
attempt to incorporate the rich phenomenology of the synaptic plasticity field, which is
among the largest and most active in cortical
neuroscience71–73. Instead, we provide some
guidelines for the types of measurements

that can be carried out. In ‘short-term
plasticity’, the kinetics of synaptic facilitation/augmentation, depression and posttetanic potentiation vary considerably74–76. In
‘long-term plasticity’, the same kinetics can
be measured, as well as the polarity charge
and amplitude77. Furthermore, transmitter
release by and on to interneurons is also
controlled by neuromodulators, such as
acetylcholine, serotonin, noradrenaline and
endocannabinoids78–83. Studies have shown
that different neuromodulators have differential effects on different types of cells.
In the future, this might also help to classify
neocortical interneurons.
The electrical properties of gap junctions include how strongly they are coupled
— the ‘coupling coefficient’ is the ratio of
the voltage response in one cell to the
voltage response in another. Another
gap-junction property is ‘rectification’,
in which a rapid change in conductance in
one cell occurs when the difference in voltage between the two coupled cells changes
sign, or when the coupling ratio is
voltage-dependent78.
Extracellular recordings. Interneurons are
embedded in circuits that can modify their
firing properties in a state-dependent manner. In addition to intracellular recordings,
interneurons can be recorded extracellularly
to broadly characterize their spiking patterns
during responses to sensory input or in association with oscillatory population activity.
An important goal of physiological characterization is to be able to recognize interneuron types by their extracellular features in
behaving animals84. The ‘functional response
specificity’ of an interneuron refers to its role
or function in vivo, such as its receptive-field
properties. Several extracellular features,
such as spike waveform, firing rate, spike
dynamics (including many of the spiking
patterns described above), spontaneous and
evoked properties and the ‘phase relationship’
between the interneuron spiking and localfield oscillations, can be quantified65,85–87.
To date, however, no agreed criteria are
available to reliably classify in vivo recorded
interneurons. Future research should clarify
the relationship between in vitro and in vivo
characterization49.
Concluding remarks
A community agreement on the most useful
and accurate terms to describe the morphological, molecular and electrophysiological
features of cortical GABAergic interneurons
is an essential step towards establishing and
maintaining effective scientific

564 | july 2008 | volume 9	

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Perspectives
Box 3 | Petilla terminology in action: the Martinotti cell
One of the classic interneurons of the cerebral cortex, the Martinotti cell (MC) was first described by
Carlo Martinotti104 and was proposed by Ramón y Cajal to play a part in cortical sensorimotor
processing2. The MC is characterized anatomically by ascending axonal collaterals that reach layer 1
and then ramify to form a fan-like spread of axonal collaterals5. A biocytin reconstruction of a
layer-5 low-threshold spiking MC from mouse somatosensory cortex88 shows its triangular soma and
aspiny multipolar dendrites (shown in blue in part A of the figure). Its axon (shown in red) originates
at the soma, arborizes locally in layer 5, descends to the white matter, and ascends radially towards
layer 1, where it arborizes densely with spine-like boutons, mostly on dendritic shafts of the apical
tufts of pyramidal neurons105,106. Although the physiology of MCs can vary106,107, the intrinsic
physiology (see figure, part Ba) is characteristic: it has a burst-onset response and, at steady state,
shows spike amplitude accommodation and pronounced frequency adaptation. It responds to a
hyperpolarizing current step with a sag (indicated by the arrow) and bursts on rebound (indicated by
the arrowhead). A common feature of its synaptic physiology, shown in part Bb, is its strong shortterm facilitation of slow excitatory postsynaptic potentials and its bursting response to successive
synaptic stimulations (indicated by the three circles). Recently, the molecular and genetic details of
this phenotype have begun to be clarified (part C). Most consistently, MCs express somatostatin
(SOM) and occasionally calbindin (CB), but not parvalbumin (PV) or vasoactive intestinal peptide
(VIP)107. Part Ca illustrates somatostatin-positive cells from layers 4 and 5 of the visual cortex of a
somatostatin/green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic mouse. In part Cb, single-cell reverse
transcriptase (RT) PCR analysis of an MC reveals a typical neurochemical profile106, including the
expression of SOM and a repertoire of K+ and Ca2+ channels that underlie MC physiological
properties. Ca, calcium channel; CCK, cholesystokinin; CR, calretinin ; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase; HCN, hyperpolarization-activated cyclic-nucleotide-gated channel;
MW, molecular-weight marker; NPY, neuropeptide Y; SK, small conductance Ca2+-activated K+
channel. Parts A and B reproduced, with permission, from REF. 88  (2004) Cambridge University
Press. Part Cb reproduced, with permission, from REF. 106  (2004) Cambridge University Press.

A Anatomical

B Physiological
Ba Intrinsic

Bb Synaptic

40 mv –70

1

–70
40 ms

400 pA

2/3

C Molecular
Ca SOM-GFP mouse

Kv
Kv3.3
3.4
MW
Kv
4.3
HC
HCN3
Ca N 4
1
Ca aA
Ca 1aB
1aG
MW
Ca
1
Ca al
b
SK 1
2

5

MW
Ca
b
Ca 3
b4

Cb Single-cell RT-PCR
CB
P
MWV
C
NP R
Y
V
SO IP
M
GA CCK
PD
H

4

400 ms

20 µm

Kv
Kv 1.1
1.2
MW
Kv
1
Kv .6
Kv 2.1
2
Kv .2
Kv 3.1
3
Kv .2
4
Kv .1
Kv b1
HCb2
N
M 1
HC W
N2

6

communication in this field. It will be
particularly useful for facilitating the collaboration of investigators from different
research subcommunities and scientific
backgrounds. A combination of techniques
and approaches can aid the characterization
of cortical cells (as illustrated in BOX 3 for the
Martinotti neuron88).

Nature Reviews | Neuroscience

It is also important to acknowledge again
that there might not be full agreement on the
terms we have chosen for the nomenclature,
and we remain open to suggestions and
feedback from all readers and interested
researchers. An example of one such area of
potential disagreement is the laminar location of the somata of cortical interneurons.

Although its importance as a feature is not
yet agreed upon, location is included in our
nomenclature.
A community-approved terminology for
classifying cortical neurons is also a goal of
the Neuroscience Information Framework
project, which is funded by the US
National Institutes of Health Blueprint for
Neuroscience. The project intends to decide
on a nomenclature tree, with subtypes of
cortical neurons defined according to one
of the principal schemes (morphological,
molecular or physiological), and with the
other dimensions or schemes represented
as attributes that could potentially modify
terms anywhere in the basic tree. A further
goal of the project is that the scheme be both
adaptive (as more data or more-refined distinctions are introduced) and generalizable
to non-cortical cells.
It is tempting at this stage to endeavour
to decide the most important properties
with which to define a class of interneurons.
However, after extensive discussion within
our group and with the rest of the community, a strong consensus emerged that this
would be counter-productive at this point.
Because cortical interneurons are such
multi­faceted entities, their classification
using a few ‘essential’ descriptors (such as
morphological descriptors) does not yet
match well with classifications using other
schemes (such as electrophysiological
schemes)89. Ultimately, a simple classification might be based on the role of interneuron subtypes in the circuit. However, such
a classification is premature in the absence
of a clear functional understanding of the
contribution that each element makes to the
neocortical network. This work has instead
leveraged the expertise from different fields
of neuroscience to identify the descriptors
that are most likely to lead to a useful
multidimensional classification. Efforts are
underway to organize future meetings that
would serve both as an open platform from
which to revise and refine this nomenclature
and as a way to move towards the goal
of unifying the classification of cortical
interneurons.
The Petilla terminology, even before its
publication, has already been used as a recognized reference in the recent literature90,91.
Ideally, this consensus will foster discussion
to identify those features that are most
consistently predictive, functionally relevant
and empirically useful in characterizing
cells in the mammalian nervous system. For
example, a pure morphological classification
of layer-5 neurons from the mouse primary
visual cortex revealed classes of both

nature reviews | neuroscience	

volume 9 | july 2008 | 565
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Perspectives
pyramidal cells and interneurons. Somatic
and dendritic metrics similar to those that
are described in this document were used to
quantitatively distinguish these classes92.

There are likely to be correlations among
the morphological, biophysical, molecular
and synaptic properties. For instance, the
presence of certain molecular markers (such

Box 4 | Species differences: neurogliaform (NGF) cells in primates and rodents
The figure shows axonal and dendritic patterns of NGF cells from the monkey (a) and the rat (b)
prefrontal cortex. In both species these interneurons can be readily identified on the basis of their
distinctive morphological features. Monkey NGF cells have only a few morphological features that
differ from rat NGF cells, including a larger soma, a greater number of dendrites and a more compact
axonal field. Parts c and d show Sholl analysis of neuronal arbors from nine monkey and seven rat
NGF cells. Average dendritic (c) and axonal (d) intersections are plotted against the distance from
the soma (for data marked with an asterisk, p<0.05; error bars represent standard error). Primary
dendrites of monkey NGF cells have more intersections than those of rat NGF cells. In contrast to the
morphological similarity, whole-cell recordings of the responses to injected current steps reveal a
number of differences between monkey and rat NGF cells (see also Supplementary information S10).
Monkey NGF cells consistently generate a short-latency first spike that rides on an initial
depolarizing hump, whereas in rat NGF cells the first spike appears after a substantial delay riding on
a depolarizing ramp that is not seen in monkey NGF cells. Parts e and f show the subthreshold
membrane properties of NGF cells in monkey and rat. Voltage responses to the hyperpolarizing
current steps are shown in e. Both monkey and rat NGF cells show time-independent inward
rectification. Subthreshold voltage responses to depolarizing current pulses are shown in f. The
arrows points to the ‘hump’ in the monkey response and to the ‘ramp’ in the rat response. Thus,
although rat NGF cells are traditionally classified as late-spiking cells, monkey NGF cells do not meet
this physiological criterion. In addition, NGF cells in monkey seem to be more excitable than those in
rat, because they display higher input resistance, lower spike threshold and higher firing frequency.
Finally, NGF cells in monkey show a more prominent spike frequency adaptation than in rat. Figure
reproduced, with permission, from REF. 100  (2007) American Physiological Society.

a

d

120

Monkey
Rat

Axonal intersections

100

b

80

*

60

*

*

40

*

*

20

**

*

0
0

100 µm

100

200

300

400

500

600

Distance from soma (mm)

e

Monkey

–63 mV

Rat
–64 mV
10 mV

100 pA
100 ms

c
Dendritic intersections

40

Monkey
Rat

*

30

Monkey

f
–80 mV

Rat
15 mV

–80 mV

100 pA
100 ms

20
10

Monkey

0

–65 mV
0

20

40

60

80

Distance from soma (mm)

566 | july 2008 | volume 9	

Rat
–64 mV

100

as voltage-gated ion channels or metabotropic receptors) might have specific electrophysiological implications13, whereas other
markers (such as cell-adhesion proteins or
neurotrophic factors) might correspond
to particular morphological phenotypes.
Some combinations might be common and
others might be rare. The more that these
correlations are identified and validated, the
faster we will advance towards agreeing on a
classification scheme. For example, morphological and electrophysiological measurements of three molecularly identified sets
of interneurons uncovered a correlation
between synaptic input kinetics and axonal
morphologies32.
A number of other aspects should be considered, such as developmental ontogeny31,93
and the function that the interneuron has
in the local circuit94. Although these other
features are likely to be crucially related to
interneuron structure and function, their
complexity constitutes a major challenge
to categorization, particularly by multiple
researchers with different viewpoints. Yet,
we consider these criteria to be important
and we will not renounce them in future
efforts, because research will probably help
to clarify which features of these criteria are
most important for distinguishing between
interneurons. Many cortical interneurons
perform multiple functional roles, switching
dynamically on the basis of local and afferent
activity95. Moreover, intracellular dynamics,
such as dendritic Ca2+ signalling (FIG. 4c–f),
can also vary substantially in distinct types
and even subtypes of cortical interneurons66,88,96–99. Furthermore, properties of
cortical GABAergic interneurons might
also differ across species, especially between
primates and rodents, in which differences
in the relative proportions of cell types and
their embryonic origins have been reported.
For example, a recent study revealed both
differences and similarities in the properties
of neurogliaform inhibitory neurons in the
prefrontal cortex of macaque monkeys and
rats100 (BOX 4; Supplementary information
S10 (figure)). Thus, the canonical cortical
circuit differs in at least some aspects of its
constituent elements across species.
Similarly, many of the features that are
discussed here vary considerably across age
groups, as well as with disease and genetic,
pharmacological, surgical and behavioural
manipulations. The comprehensive collection of such complex information is
likely to go beyond the possibilities of
individual laboratories and to require
federated programmes101. Ongoing efforts
are already striving to gather relevant

Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

Perspectives
information from the internet (for example,
the Neurogateway), the neuroscience
literature (for example, SenseLab), shared
digital data102 (for example, NeuroMorpho)
or by direct experimental acquisition103. A
widespread convergence on a common set
of terms is necessary. We look forward to a
dynamic evolution of the Petilla nomenclature with the constructive participation of all
active researchers.
*A full list of authors appears in Box 1.
Giorgio A. Ascoli is at the Molecular Neuroscience
Department and Center for Neural Informatics,
Structures, and Plasticity, Krasnow Institute for
Advanced Study, George Mason University, MS2A1,
4400 University Drive, Fairfax, Virginia 22030, USA.
Rafael Yuste is at Columbia University, 1212
Amsterdam Avenue, Box 2435, New York, New York
10027, USA.
Correspondence to G.A.A. or R.Y.
e-mails: ascoli@gmu.edu;
rmy5@columbia.edu
doi:10.1038/nrn2402
1.	

2.	

3.	

4.	
5.	

6.	
7.	
8.	

9.	
10.	

11.	
12.	

13.	

14.	
15.	

Somogyi, P., Tamas, G., Lujan, R. & Buhl, E. H.
Salient features of synaptic organisation in the cerebral
cortex. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 26, 113–135
(1998).
Ramón y Cajal, S. Textura del sistema nervioso del
hombre y de los vertebrados (Moya, Madrid, 1899).
English translation: Histology of the Nervous System
of Man and Vertebrates (Oxford Univ. Press, New
York, 1995)
Lorente de Nó, R. La corteza cerebral de ratón.
(Primera contribución - La corteza acústica). Trabajos
del Laboratorio de Investigaciones Biológicas de la
Universidad de Madrid 20, 41–78 (1922). English
translation: Fairén, A., Regidor, J. & Kruger, L. The
cerebral cortex of the mouse (a first contribution - the
“acoustic” cortex). Somatosens. Mot. Res. 9, 3–36
(1992).
Szentagóthai, J. The neuron network of the cerebral
cortex: a functional interpretation. Proc. R. Soc. Lond.
B Biol. Sci. 201, 219–248 (1978).
Fairén, A., DeFelipe, J. & Regidor, J. in Cerebral Cortex
vol. 1 Cellular Components of the Cerebral Cortex
(eds, Peters, A. & Jones, E. G.) 201–253 (Plenum,
New York, 1984).
Lund, J. S. Anatomical organization of macaque
monkey striate visual cortex. Ann. Rev. Neurosci.
11, 253–288 (1988).
Douglas, R. J. & Martin, K. A. C. in The Synaptic
Organization of the Brain (ed. Shepherd, G. M.)
459–511 (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1998).
Gupta, A., Wang, Y. & Markram, H. Organizing
principles for a diversity of GABAergic interneurons
and synapses in the neocortex. Science 287,
273–278 (2000).
Lacaille, J. C., Kunkel, D. D. & Schwartzkroin, P. A. in
The Hippocampus: New Vistas (eds Chan-Palay, V. &
Kohler, C.) 287–305 (Liss, 1989).
Maccaferri, G. & Lacaille, J. C. Interneuron diversity
series: Hippocampal interneuron classifications making things as simple as possible, not simpler.
Trends Neurosci. 26, 564–571 (2003).
Cauli, B. et al. Molecular and physiological diversity of
cortical nonpyramidal cells. J. Neurosci. 17,
3894–3906 (1997).
Kawaguchi, Y. Physiological, morphological, and
histochemical characterization of three classes of
interneurons in rat neostriatum. J. Neurosci. 13,
4908–4923 (1993).
Toledo-Rodriguez, M. et al. Correlation maps allow
neuronal electrical properties to be predicted from
single-cell gene expression profiles in rat neocortex.
Cereb. Cortex 14, 1310–1327 (2004).
Kostyuk, P. G. Synaptic mechanism of central
inhibition. Prog. Brain Res. 22, 67–85 (1968).
Huang, Z. J., Di Cristo, G. & Ango, F. Development
of GABA innervation in the cerebral and cerebellar
cortices. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 8, 673–686 (2007).

16.	 Bayraktar, T., Welker, E., Freund, T. F., Zilles, K. &
Staiger, J. F. Neurons immunoreactive for vasoactive
intestinal polypeptide in the rat primary
somatosensory cortex: morphology and spatial
relationship to barrel-related columns. J. Comp.
Neurol. 420, 291–304 (2000).
17.	 Porter, J. T. et al. Properties of bipolar VIPergic
interneurons and their excitation by pyramidal
neurons in the rat neocortex. Eur. J. Neurosci. 10,
3617–3628 (1998).
18.	 Rozov, A., Jerecic, J., Sakmann, B. & Burnashev, N.
AMPA receptor channels with long-lasting desensitization
in bipolar interneurons contribute to synaptic depression
in a novel feedback circuit in layer 2/3 of rat neocortex.
J. Neurosci. 21, 8062–8071 (2001).
19.	 Zilberter, Y., Kaiser, K. M. & Sakmann, B. Dendritic
GABA release depresses excitatory transmission
between layer 2/3 pyramidal and bitufted neurons in
rat neocortex. Neuron 24, 979–988 (1999).
20.	 Scorcioni, R. & Ascoli, G. A. Algorithmic extraction of
morphological statistics from electronic archives of
neuroanatomy. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 2084,
30–37 (2001).
21.	 Rall, W. Electrophysiology of a dendritic neuron model.
Biophys. J. 2, 145–167 (1962).
22.	 Sholl, D. A. Dendritic organization in the neurons of
the visual cortex and motor cortices of the cat.
J. Anat. 87, 387–406 (1953).
23.	 Sholl, D. A. The organization of the visual cortex in the
cat. J. Anat. 89, 33–46 (1953).
24.	 Cannon, R. C., Wheal, H. V. & Turner, D. A. Dendrites
of classes of hippocampal neurons differ in structural
complexity and branching patterns. J. Comp. Neurol.
413, 619–633 (1999).
25.	 Li, Y., Brewer, D., Burke, R. E. & Ascoli, G. A.
Developmental changes in spinal motoneuron
dendrites in neonatal mice. J. Comp. Neurol. 483,
304–317 (2005).
26.	 Uylings, H. B. M. & van Pelt, J. Measures for
quantifying dendritic arborizations. Netw. Comput.
Neural Syst. 13, 397–414 (2002).
27.	 Gray, E. G. Axo-somatic and axo-dendritic synapses of
the cerebral cortex: an electron microscopic study.
J. Anat. 93, 420–433 (1959).
28.	 Colonnier, M. Synaptic patterns on different cell types
in the different laminae of the cat visual cortex. An
electron microscope study. Brain Res. 9, 268–287
(1968).
29.	 Peters, A., Palay, S. L. & Webster, H. deF. The Fine
Structure of the Nervous System. Neurons and their
Supporting Cells (Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1991).
30.	 Gulyás, A. I., Megías, M., Emri, Z. & Freund, T. F. Total
number and ratio of excitatory and inhibitory synapses
converging onto single interneurons of different types
in the CA1 area of the rat hippocampus. J. Neurosci.
19, 10082–10097 (1999).
31.	 Butt, S. J. et al. The temporal and spatial origins of
cortical interneurons predict their physiological
subtype. Neuron 48, 591–604 (2005).
32.	 Dumitriu, D., Cossart, R., Huang, J. & Yuste, R.
Correlation between axonal morphologies and
synaptic input kinetics of interneurons from mouse
visual cortex. Cereb. Cortex 17, 81–91 (2007).
33.	 Sik, A., Ylinen, A., Penttonen, M. & Buzsáki, G.
Inhibitory CA1‑CA3‑hilar region feedback in the
hippocampus. Science 265, 1722–1724 (1994).
34.	 Sik, A., Penttonen, M., Ylinen, A. & Buzsáki, G.
Hippocampal CA1 interneurons: an in vivo intracellular
labeling study. J. Neurosci. 15, 6651–6665 (1995).
35.	 Sik, A., Penttonen, M. & Buzsáki, G. Interneurons in
the hippocampal dentate gyrus: an in vivo intracellular
study. Eur. J. Neurosci. 9, 573–588 (1997).
36.	 Jinno, S. et al. Neuronal diversity in GABAergic longrange projections from the hippocampus. J. Neurosci.
27, 8790–8804 (2007).
37.	 Miyashita, T. & Rockland, K. S. GABAergic projections
from the hippocampus to the retrosplenial cortex in
the rat. Eur. J. Neurosci. 26, 1193–1204 (2007).
38.	 Tomioka, R. & Rockland, K. S. Long-distance
corticocortical GABAergic neurons in the adult monkey
white and gray matter. J. Comp. Neurol. 505,
526–538 (2007).
39.	 Tamas, G., Somogyi, P. & Buhl, E. H. Differentially
interconnected networks of GABAergic interneurons in
the visual cortex of the cat. J. Neurosci. 18,
4255–4270 (1998).
40.	 Somogyi, P. & Cowey, A. Combined Golgi and
electron microscopic study on the synapses formed
by double bouquet cells in the visual cortex of the cat
and monkey. J. Comp. Neurol. 195, 547–566
(1981).
41.	 Somogyi, P. & Cowey, A. in Cerebral Ccortex vol. 1
Cellular Components of the Cerebral Cortex (eds

42.	
43.	
44.	

45.	

46.	
47.	

48.	

49.	
50.	
51.	
52.	
53.	

54.	

55.	

56.	

57.	

58.	

59.	

60.	
61.	
62.	

63.	
64.	

65.	
66.	

67.	

Peters, A. & Jones, E. G.) 337–360 (Plenum, New
York, 1984).
White, E. L. Cortical Circuits. Synaptic Organization of
the Cerebral Cortex (Birkhauser, Boston, 1989).
Valverde, F. The organization of area 18 in the
monkey: Golgi study. Anat. Embryol. 154, 305–334
(1978).
Ballesteros-Yánez, I. et al. The double bouquet cell in
the human cerebral cortex and a comparison with
other mammals. J. Comp. Neurol. 486, 344–360
(2005).
Binzegger, T., Douglas, R. J. & Martin, K. A.
Stereotypical bouton clustering of individual neurons
in cat primary visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 27,
12242–12254 (2007).
Tamas, G., Buhl, E. H. & Somogyi, P. Massive autaptic
self-innervation of GABAergic neurons in cat visual
cortex. J. Neurosci. 17, 6352–6364 (1997).
Peters, A. & Harriman, K. M. Different kinds of axon
terminals forming symmetric synapses with the cell
bodies and initial axon segments of layer II/III
pyramidal cells. I. Morphometric analysis.
J. Neurocytol. 19, 154–174 (1990).
DeFelipe, J., Hendry, S. H., Jones, E. G. & Schmechel, D.
Variability in the terminations of GABAergic chandelier
cell axons on initial segments of pyramidal cell axons
in the monkey sensory-motor cortex.
J. Comp. Neurol. 231, 364–384 (1985).
Somogyi, P. & Klausberger, T. Defined types of cortical
interneuron structure space and spike timing in the
hippocampus. J. Physiol. 562, 9–26 (2005).
DeFelipe, J. (ed.) J. Neurocytol. 31, 181–416 (2002).
McBain, C. J. & Fisahn, A. Interneurons unbound.
Nature Rev. Neurosci. 2, 11–23 (2001).
Bennett, M. V. & Zukin, R. S. Electrical coupling and
neuronal synchronization in the mammalian brain.
Neuron 41, 495–511 (2004).
Tamas, G., Buhl, E. H., Lörincz, A. & Somogyi, P.
Proximally targeted GABAergic synapses and gap
junctions synchronize cortical interneurons. Nature
Neurosci. 3, 366–371 (2000).
Fukuda, T. & Kosaka, T. Ultrastructural study of gap
junctions between dendrites of parvalbumincontaining GABAergic neurons in various neocortical
areas of the adult rat. Neuroscience 120, 5–20 (2003).
Zoli, M., Jansson, A., Sykova, E., Agnati, L. F. & Fuxe, K.
Volume transmission in the CNS and its relevance for
neuropsychopharmacology. Trends Pharmacol. Sci.
20, 142–150 (1999).
Vizi, E. S. Role of high-affinity receptors and
membrane transporters in nonsynaptic
communication and drug action in the central nervous
system. Pharmacol. Rev. 52, 63–89 (2000).
Monyer, H. & Markram, H. Interneuron diversity
series: Molecular and genetic tools to study
GABAergic interneuron diversity and function. Trends
Neurosci. 27, 90–97 (2004).
Ray, A., Zoidl, G., Weickert, S., Wahle, P. &
Dermietzel, R. Site-specific and developmental
expression of pannexin1 in the mouse nervous system.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 21, 3277–3290 (2005).
Kamme, F. et al. Single-cell microarray analysis in
hippocampus CA1: demonstration and validation of
cellular heterogeneity. J. Neurosci. 23, 3607–3615
(2003).
Sugino, K. et al. Molecular taxonomy of major
neuronal classes in the adult mouse forebrain. Nature
Neurosci. 9, 99–107 (2006).
DeFelipe, J. Chandelier cells and epilepsy. Brain 122,
1807–1822 (1999).
Llinás, R. R., Grace, A. A. & Yarom, Y. In vitro neurons
in mammalian cortical layer 4 exhibit intrinsic
oscillatory activity in the 10- to 50-Hz frequency range.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 88, 897–901 (1991).
Hutcheon, B. & Yarom, Y. Resonance, oscillation and
the intrinsic frequency preferences of neurons. Trends
Neurosci. 23, 216–222 (2000).
Pike, F. G. et al. Distinct frequency preferences of
different types of rat hippocampal neurones in
response to oscillatory input currents. J. Physiol. 529,
205–213 (2000).
Klausberger, T. et al. Brain‑state‑ and cell‑type‑specific
firing of hippocampal interneurons in vivo. Nature
421, 844–848 (2003).
Goldberg, J. H., Tamas, G. & Yuste, R. Ca2+ imaging of
mouse neocortical interneurone dendrites: Ia-type K+
channels control action potential backpropagation.
J. Physiol. 551, 49–65 (2003).
Ali, A. B., Bannister, A. P. & Thomson, A. M. Robust
correlations between action potential duration and the
properties of synaptic connections in layer 4
interneurones in juvenile and adult neocortical slices.
J. Physiol. 580, 149–169 (2007).

nature reviews | neuroscience	

volume 9 | july 2008 | 567
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Perspectives
68.	 Kröner, S., Krimer, L. S., Lewis, D. A. & Barrionuevo, G.
Dopamine increases inhibition in the monkey
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex through cell typespecific modulation of interneurons. Cereb. Cortex 17,
1020–1032 (2007).
69.	 Thomson, A. M., West, D. C. & Deuchars, J. Properties
of single axon EPSPs elicited in spiny interneurones by
action potentials in pyramidal neurones in slices of rat
neocortex. Neuroscience 69, 727–738 (1995).
70.	 Ali, A. B. & Thomson, A. M. Synaptic a5 subunit
containing GABAA receptors mediate IPSPs elicited by
dendrite-targeting cells in rat neocortex. Cereb. Cortex
18, 1260–1271 (2008).
71.	 Markram, H. & Tsodyks, M. Redistribution of synaptic
efficacy between neocortical pyramidal neurons.
Nature 382, 807–810 (1996).
72.	 Kullmann, D. M. & Lamsa, K. P. Long-term synaptic
plasticity in hippocampal interneurons. Nature Rev.
Neurosci. 8, 687–699 (2007).
73.	 Pelletier, J. G. & Lacaille, J. C. Long-term synaptic
plasticity in hippocampal feedback inhibitory
networks. Prog. Brain Res. 169, 241–250 (2008).
74.	 Thomson, A. M., Deuchars, J. & West, D. C. Single
axon EPSPs in neocortical interneurones exhibit
pronounced paired pulse facilitation. Neuroscience
54, 347–360 (1993).
75.	 Thomson, A. M., West, D. C., Wang, Y. &
Bannister, A. P. Synaptic connections and small
circuits involving excitatory and inhibitory neurones in
layers 2 to 5 of adult rat and cat neocortex: triple
intracellular recordings and biocytin-labelling in vitro.
Cereb. Cortex 12, 936–953 (2002).
76.	 West, D. C., Mercer, A., Kirchhecker, S., Morris, O. T. &
Thomson, A. M. Layer 6 cortico- thalamic pyramidal
cells preferentially innervate interneurons and
generate facilitating EPSPs. Cereb. Cortex 16,
200–211 (2006).
77.	 Maffei, A., Nataraj, K., Nelson, S. B. & Turrigiano, G. G.
Potentiation of cortical inhibition by visual deprivation.
Nature 443, 81–84 (2006).
78.	 Kawaguchi, Y. & Shindou, T. Noradrenergic excitation
and inhibition of GABAergic cell types in rat frontal
cortex. J. Neurosci. 18, 6963–6976 (1998).
79.	 Xiang, Z., Huguenard, J. R. & Prince, D. A. Cholinergic
switching within neocortical inhibitory networks.
Science 281, 985–988 (1998).
80.	 Férézou, I. et al. 5‑HT3 receptors mediate
serotonergic fast synaptic excitation of neocortical
vasoactive intestinal peptide/cholecystokinin
interneurons. J. Neurosci. 22, 7389–7397 (2002).
81.	 Bacci, A., Huguenard, J. R. & Prince, D. A. Long-lasting
self-inhibition of neocortical interneurons mediated by
endocannabinoids. Nature 431, 312–316 (2004).
82.	 Bodor, A. L. et al. Endocannabinoid signaling in rat
somatosensory cortex: laminar differences and
involvement of specific interneuron types. J. Neurosci.
25, 6845–6856 (2005).
83.	 Gulledge, A. T., Park, S. B., Kawaguchi, Y. & Stuart, G. J.
Heterogeneity of phasic cholinergic signaling in
neocortical neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 97, 2215–2229
(2007).
84.	 Buzsáki, G. Large-scale recording of neuronal
ensembles. Nature Neurosci. 7, 446–451 (2004).
85.	 Csicsvari, J., Hirase, H., Czurkó, A., Mamiya, A. &
Buzsáki, G. Oscillatory coupling of hippocampal
pyramidal cells and interneurons in the behaving rat.
J. Neurosci. 19, 274–287 (1999).
86.	 Barthó, P. et al. Characterization of neocortical
principal cells and interneurons by network
interactions and extracellular features.
J. Neurophysiol. 92, 600–608 (2004).
87.	 Klausberger, T. et al. Spike timing of dendrite-targeting
bistratified cells during hippocampal network
oscillations in vivo. Nature Neurosci. 7, 41–47
(2004).
88.	 Goldberg, J. H., Lacefield, C. O. & Yuste, R. Global
dendritic calcium spikes in mouse layer 5 low
threshold spiking interneurones: implications for
control of pyramidal cell bursting. J. Physiol. 558,
465–478 (2004).
89.	 Tyner, C. F. The naming of neurons: applications of
taxonomic theory to the study of cellular populations.
Brain Behav. Evol. 12, 75–96 (1975).
90.	 Bota, M. & Swanson, L. W. The neuron classification
problem. Brain Res. Rev. 56, 79–88 (2007).
91.	 Miyoshi, G., Butt, S. J., Takebayashi, H. & Fishell, G.
Physiologically distinct temporal cohorts of cortical
interneurons arise from telencephalic Olig2-expressing
precursors. J. Neurosci. 27, 7786–7798 (2007).
92.	 Tsiola, A., Hamzei-Sichani, F., Peterlin, Z. & Yuste, R.
Quantitative morphologic classification of layer 5
neurons from mouse primary visual cortex. J. Comp.
Neurol. 461, 415–428 (2003).

93.	 Wonders, C. P. & Anderson, S. A. The origin and
specification of cortical interneurons. Nature Rev.
Neurosci. 7, 687–696 (2006).
94.	 Thomson, A. M. & Lamy, C. Functional maps of
neocortical local circuitry. Front. Neurosci. 1, 19–42
(2007).
95.	 Swadlow, H. A. Fast-spike interneurons and
feedforward inhibition in awake sensory neocortex.
Cereb. Cortex 13, 25–32 (2003).
96.	 Goldberg, J. H., Tamas, G., Aronov, D. & Yuste, R.
Calcium microdomains in aspiny dendrites. Neuron
40, 807–821 (2003).
97.	 Goldberg, J. H., Yuste, R. & Tamas, G. Ca2+ imaging of
mouse neocortical interneurone dendrites:
contribution of Ca2+-permeable AMPA and NMDA
receptors to subthreshold Ca2+ dynamics. J. Physiol.
551, 67–78 (2003).
98.	 Kaiser, K. M., Zilberter, Y. & Sakmann, B. Backpropagating action potentials mediate calcium
signalling in dendrites of bitufted interneurons in layer
2/3 of rat somatosensory cortex. J. Physiol. 535,
17–31 (2001).
99.	 Kaiser, K. M., Zilberter, Y. & Sakmann, B. Postsynaptic
calcium influx at single synaptic contacts between
pyramidal neurons and bitufted interneurons in layer
2/3 of rat neocortex is enhanced by backpropagating
action potentials. J. Neurosci. 24, 1319–1329
(2004).
100.	Povysheva, N. V. et al. Electrophysiological differences
between neurogliaform cells from monkey and rat
prefrontal cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 97, 1030–1039
(2007).
101.	 Ascoli, G. A. Mobilizing the base of neuroscience
data: the case of neuronal morphologies. Nature Rev.
Neurosci. 7, 318–324 (2007).
102.	Ascoli, G. A., Donohue, D. E. & Halavi, M.
NeuroMorpho.Org: a central resource for neuronal
morphologies. J. Neurosci. 27, 9247–9251 (2007).
103.	Markram, H. The Blue Brain Project. Nature Rev.
Neurosci. 7, 153–160 (2006).
104.	Martinotti, C. Contributo allo studio della corteccia
cerebrale, ed all’origine centrale dei nervi. Ann.
Freniatr. Sci. Affini. 1, 14–381 (1889).

105.	Marin-Padilla, M. in Cerebral Cortex: Cellular
Components of the Cerebral Cortex (eds Peters, A. &
Jones, E. G.) 447–478 (Plenum, New York, 1984).
106.	Wang, Y. et al. Anatomical, physiological and
molecular properties of Martinotti cells in the
somatosensory cortex of the juvenile rat. J. Physiol.
561, 65–90 (2004).
107.	 Kawaguchi, Y. & Kubota, Y. GABAergic cell subtypes
and their synaptic connections in rat frontal cortex.
Cereb. Cortex 7, 476–486 (1997).
108.	Tamás, G., Lorincz, A., Simon, A. & Szabadics, J.
Identified sources and targets of slow inhibition
in the neocortex. Science 299, 1902–1905 (2003).
109.	Toledo-Rodriguez, M. Genetical, Anatomical and
Electrical Determinants of Neuronal Diversity. Thesis,
Weizmann Inst. Sci.
110.	 Goldberg, J. H. & Yuste, R. Space matters: local and
global dendritic Ca2+ compartmentalization in cortical
interneurons. Trends Neurosci. 28, 158–167 (2005).

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to funding agencies in their respective countries for supporting this work. The Gobierno de
Navarra/Nafarroako Gobernua and the town and people of
Petilla are acknowledged for graciously hosting the meeting
that originated this document. Special thanks are due to
A. Rowan, who attended the Petilla meeting and greatly
contributed to establishing the initial vision for this report.

FURTHER INFORMATION
Petilla Terminology: http://krasnow.gmu.edu/cng/petilla/
Neuroscience Information Framework: http://nif.nih.gov/
Neurogateway: http://www.neurogateway.org/
SenseLab: http://senselab.med.yale.edu
NeuroMorpho: http://neuromorpho.org

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
See online article: S1 (box) | S2 (box) | S3 (box) | S4 (box) | S5
(figure) | S6 (figure) | S7 (figure) | S8 (figure) | S9 (figure) | S10
(figure)
All links are active in the online pdf

S C IEN C E A ND S O C IE T Y

Brain foods: the effects of nutrients
on brain function
Fernando Gómez-Pinilla

Abstract | It has long been suspected that the relative abundance of specific
nutrients can affect cognitive processes and emotions. Newly described influences
of dietary factors on neuronal function and synaptic plasticity have revealed
some of the vital mechanisms that are responsible for the action of diet on brain
health and mental function. Several gut hormones that can enter the brain, or that
are produced in the brain itself, influence cognitive ability. In addition, wellestablished regulators of synaptic plasticity, such as brain-derived neurotrophic
factor, can function as metabolic modulators, responding to peripheral signals such
as food intake. Understanding the molecular basis of the effects of food on
cognition will help us to determine how best to manipulate diet in order to increase
the resistance of neurons to insults and promote mental fitness.
Although food has classically been perceived
as a means to provide energy and building
material to the body, its ability to prevent
and protect against diseases is starting to be
recognized. In particular, research over the
past 5 years has provided exciting evidence

for the influence of dietary factors on
specific molecular systems and mechanisms
that maintain mental function. For instance,
a diet that is rich in omega‑3 fatty acids is
garnering appreciation for supporting cognitive processes in humans1 and upregulating

568 | july 2008 | volume 9	

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

