9124 • The Journal of Neuroscience, June 22, 2011 • 31(25):9124 –9134

Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive

Corticothalamic Feedback Controls Sleep Spindle Duration
In Vivo
Maxime Bonjean,1,2 Tanya Baker,1 Maxime Lemieux,3 Igor Timofeev,3,4 Terrence Sejnowski,1,2 and Maxim Bazhenov1,5
1

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, 2Department of Biological Sciences, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, 3Centre de Recherche de l’Universite´ Laval Robert-Giffard, Quebec G1J 2G3, Canada, 4Department of
Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec G1V 0A6, Canada, and 5Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of
California, Riverside, California 92521

Spindle oscillations are commonly observed during stage 2 of non-rapid eye movement sleep. During sleep spindles, the cerebral cortex
and thalamus interact through feedback connections. Both initiation and termination of spindle oscillations are thought to originate in
the thalamus based on thalamic recordings and computational models, although some in vivo results suggest otherwise. Here, we have
used computer modeling and in vivo multisite recordings from the cortex and the thalamus in cats to examine the involvement of the
cortex in spindle oscillations. We found that although the propagation of spindles depended on synaptic interaction within the thalamus,
the initiation and termination of spindle sequences critically involved corticothalamic influences.

Introduction
Spindle oscillations, a hallmark of slow-wave sleep, have been
linked to a wide spectrum of physiological and cognitive processes, such as synaptic plasticity and memory reconsolidation
(Born and Fehm, 1998; Stickgold, 2005). In the human electroencephalogram (EEG), these waves are grouped in short 0.5–3 s
periods of 7–15 Hz oscillations, forming a waxing-and-waning
envelope that recurs periodically every 5–15 s. These oscillations
typically appear during the light stages of slow-wave sleep (stage
2). Spindle waves of similar characteristics also appear during
slow-wave sleep in cats and have been observed with the highest
occurrence in motor, somatosensory, and associative cortical areas (Morison and Basset, 1945).
Spindles have been recorded from the cat thalamus after in
vivo decortication (Morison and Basset, 1945; Contreras et al.,
1996; Timofeev and Steriade, 1996). Spindle-like activity has also
been found in slices of the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the
ferret thalamus that included the perigeniculate nucleus (Bal and
McCormick, 1993; von Krosigk et al., 1993; Kim et al., 1995).
These observations suggest a thalamic origin for spindle oscilla-

Received Jan. 5, 2011; revised April 21, 2011; accepted May 3, 2011.
Author contributions: M.Bo. and M.Ba. designed research; M.Bo. and M.L. performed research; M.Bo., I.T., T.J.S.,
and M.Ba. analyzed data; M.Bo., T.B., I.T., T.J.S., and M.Ba. wrote the paper.
This study was supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH)-National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering Grant 1R01 EB009282 (T.S., M.Ba., and M.Bo.), Howard Hughes Medical Institute (T.S.), Crick Jacobs
Center for Theoretical and Computational Biology, Salk Institute (T.B.), NIH-National Institute of Neurological Disorders and StrokeGrant 1R01 NS060870 (M.Ba. and I.T.), Canadian Institutes of Health Research Grants MOP-37862
and MOP-67175 (I.T.), and National Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada Grant 298475 (I.T.). I.T. is
a Scholar with the “Fonds de la Recherche en Sante´ du Que´bec.” M.Bo. thanks Drs. Jay Coggan, Samat Moldakarimov,
and Jeffrey Kwong for valuable comments on the manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Maxim Bazhenov, Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience,
University of California, Riverside, CA 92521. E-mail: maksim.bazhenov@ucr.edu.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0077-11.2011
Copyright © 2011 the authors 0270-6474/11/319124-11$15.00/0

tion and raise the possibility that the neocortex is neither needed
for the initiation nor the termination of spindles.
It was proposed that a shift of the voltage activation curve of a
hyperpolarization-activated nonspecific cation current, Ih
(Soltesz et al., 1991; Lu¨thi and McCormick, 1998a)—found in
thalamic relay cells—toward more positive membrane potentials
with increasing intracellular Ca 2ϩ concentration is responsible
for terminating spindles (Destexhe and Babloyantz, 1993;
Destexhe et al., 1993, 1996; Lu¨thi and McCormick, 1998b). However, in vivo data have suggested a possible involvement of the
neocortex (Andersen et al., 1968, Contreras and Steriade, 1996,
Timofeev et al., 2001).
We used electrographic in vivo recordings in the cat and a
realistic thalamocortical network model of spindle activity to
explore the hypothesis that neocortical feedback actively regulates spindle termination in intact thalamocortical networks
and have characterized a new mechanism for spindle termination involving the desynchronization of firing between thalamic and cortical neurons. We conclude that the interaction
of thalamic and cortical mechanisms underlies sleep spindle
termination.

Materials and Methods
We used a computational model of the thalamocortical circuitry (see Fig.
1C) to investigate the interaction between the thalamus and the cortex
during spindle generation (Bazhenov et al., 2002). The predictions of the
model were tested using multisite in vivo field potential, as well as extracellular and intracellular recordings from thalamic and cortical neurons
in the cat.
In vivo experiments. All experiments were carried out in accordance
with National Institutes of Health Guidelines for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals, and protocols were approved by the institutional
care and use committee at Laval University (Quebec, Canada). All efforts
were made to minimize the number of animals used.
The electrophysiological experiments were performed on male cats
(n ϭ 5) under general anesthesia with pentobarbital (35 mg/kg) artifi-

Bonjean et al. • Control of Sleep Spindles Duration In Vivo

J. Neurosci., June 22, 2011 • 31(25):9124 –9134 • 9125

initiation and termination of spindles and
were displayed in perihistograms (time bins
set to 5 ms).
Computational model. Conductance-based
models have been used to reveal the neural correlates underlying sleep spindles (Destexhe et al.,
1994a, 1996, 1998; Bazhenov et al., 1998, 2000,
2002). These models confirmed that the interactions between reticular and thalamocortical cells
were sufficient to account for the main features of
sleep spindles, that the low-threshold Ca 2ϩ current, IT, was critical for sustaining the oscillation,
and that the cortex influenced spatial and temporal synchronizations.
However, these models relied on in vitro
thalamic studies (i.e., in the absence of the
cortex), in which calcium (Ca 2ϩ) upregulation was the only termination mechanism.
To identify how cortical feedback could affect spindles in vivo, we modified a previous
thalamocortical model (Bazhenov et al.,
2002) by increasing the strength of corticothalamic connections and reducing Ca 2ϩ
C
upregulation to more physiological values.
The thalamocortical network model had
four layers: The thalamic model had a layer of
thalamocortical relay (TC) neurons and a layer
of thalamic reticular (RE) neurons, and the two
cortical layers had an excitatory pyramidal
neuron (PY) layer and a layer of inhibitory interneurons (INs). The models for the TC and
RE cells had a single compartment. Cortical
neuron models were based on reduced equivalent models with an axosomatic and dendritic
compartments (Pinsky and Rinzel, 1994;
Mainen and Sejnowski, 1996) and adequately
Figure 1. Basic spindle properties and model topology. A, Field potential and simultaneous recordings from cortical and reproduced the relevant electrophysiological
thalamocortical neurons. A recording from reticular thalamic neuron was obtained in a different experiment [modified from aspects of spindle generation in thalamocortiTimofeev and Bazhenov (2005)]. B(1), [Ca 2ϩ]i-dependent shift in the activation curve of the hyperpolarization-activated h-type cal circuits (Bazhenov et al., 1999; 2000). The
current, Ih. T-type current, IT, allows Ca 2ϩ ions to enter the cell, bind to the mixed Na ϩ/K ϩ channel Ih, and modify its voltage- ion channels in each compartment are given
dependent properties. B(2), Binding of Ca 2ϩ ions to Ih channels shifts the voltage dependence of the current toward positive below.
membrane potentials. C, Model topology and structure of the thalamocortical network distributed into four different layers. The TC
The spatial patterns of afferents and effer(thalamocortical relay) neurons and the thalamic RE (reticular) neurons formed two of the layers, strongly interacting with each ents to these neurons were stochastically
other. The two cortical layers contained PY (pyramidal excitatory) neurons and IN (inhibitory) neurons. Connections between layers distributed according to biological measurewere stochastically distributed. Heterogeneity in the same layer was achieved through a random distribution of parameters for ments. Network heterogeneity was introduced
intrinsic properties (see Materials and Methods for details).
by stochastically varying the intrinsic cell parameters around the standard values.
Model of intrinsic currents. Each TC, RE, IN,
and PY cell was modeled with voltage- and/or
cially ventilated and paralyzed with 2% gallamine triethiodide. Stability
Ca 2ϩ-dependent currents described by Hodgkin–Huxley kinetics
of recordings was insured by draining the cisterna magna and filling the
(Hodgkin
and Huxley, 1952),
hole made on the skull with 4% agar.
Two tungsten electrodes were inserted 1.5 mm deep in the motor
cortex to record depth EEG and monitor spindles occurrence. JuxtaceldV
C m ϭ ϪgL͑V Ϫ EL͒ Ϫ Iint Ϫ Isyn,
(1)
lular recordings were performed from the motor cortex (area 4) with
dt
micropipettes filled with 0.5 M potassium acetate. We obtained local field
potential recordings with tungsten electrodes from cortical areas simulwhere V is the membrane potential, Cm is the membrane capacitance,
taneously with dual intracellular recordings with pipettes filled with 2 M
gL is the leakage conductance, EL is the reversal potential, I int is a sum
potassium acetate from the motor cortex and the thalamic ventral lateral
of active intrinsic currents of neuron j (Ij int), and I syn is a sum of
(VL) nucleus. Neuronal activities were recorded by a high-impedance
synaptic currents (Ij syn). For the PY and IN neurons, Equation 1
amplifier with active bridge circuitry.
described
dendritic membrane voltages; the right side of Equation 1
All electrographical recordings were acquired on Nicolet Vision 2.0
also included the current from adjacent (axosomatic) compartment, e.g., I d
data recorder and segments displaying clear spindles were analyzed
ϭ Ϫgc(Vd Ϫ Vs), where Vd (resp. Vs) is the voltage of the dendritic (resp.
using IGOR Pro (version 4.0). Spindles were identified on juxtacelluaxosomatic) compartment. The axosomatic and dendritic compartments
lar recordings filtered at 7–15 Hz. Initiation and termination of spinwere coupled by an axial current with conductance gc.
dles were respectively defined as the first and last cycles for which the
The TC and RE cell models had a fast sodium (Na ϩ) current, INa, a fast
amplitude was higher than ϩ1.5 standard deviation of the amplitude
potassium
(K ϩ) current, IK (Traub and Miles, 1991), a low-threshold
of the filtered recording. Spikes were detected from the same original
Ca 2ϩ current, IT [see Huguenard and McCormick (1992) for TC cells
recordings, but the traces were bandpass filtered at 100 –10,000 Hz.
and Huguenard and Prince (1992) for RE cells], and a potassium leak
Spike counts were collected in a time window of 1000 ms around the

A

B

Bonjean et al. • Control of Sleep Spindles Duration In Vivo

9126 • J. Neurosci., June 22, 2011 • 31(25):9124 –9134

A

tivating K ϩ current, IKm, a slow Ca 2ϩ-dependent K ϩ current, IKCa, a
high-threshold Ca 2ϩ current, IHVA, and a K ϩ leak current, IKL, were
included in the dendritic compartment.
The equations for the voltage- and Ca 2ϩ-dependent transition rates
for all currents were based on those given in Timofeev et al. (2000) and
Bazhenov et al. (2000, 2002) and are summarized here. All the voltagedependent ionic currents Ij int had the same general form,

I jint ϭ gjmMhN͑V Ϫ Ej͒,

B

where gj is the maximal conductance, m(t) is the activation variable, h(t) is
the inactivation variable, and (V Ϫ Ej) is the difference between membrane
potential and reversal potential. The maximal conductances and passive
properties were Ssoma ϭ 1.0 ⅐ 10 Ϫ6 cm 2, gNa ϭ 3000 mS/cm 2, gK ϭ 200
mS/cm 2, gNa(P) ϭ 0.07 mS/cm 2 for axosomatic compartments, and Cm ϭ
0.75 ␮F/cm 2, gL ϭ 0.033 mS/cm 2, gKL ϭ 0.0025 mS/cm 2, Sdend ϭ Ssoma ⅐ r,
gHVA ϭ 0.01 mS/cm 2, gNa ϭ 1.5 mS/cm 2, gKCa ϭ 0.3 mS/cm 2, gKm ϭ 0.01
mS/cm 2, and gNa(P) ϭ 0.07 mS/cm 2 for dendritic compartments; EL ϭ Ϫ68
mV and EKL ϭ Ϫ95 mV. The resistance between compartments was r ϭ 10
M⍀. The reversal potential for low-threshold Ca 2ϩ current was calculated
according to the Nernst equation,

E Ca ϭ

C

(2)

ͩ ͪ ͩ

ͪ

RT
͓Ca2ϩ͔i
log
,
2F
͓Ca2ϩ͔0

(3)

where r ϭ 8.31441 J/(mol ⅐ K), T ϭ 309.15 K, F ϭ 96,489 C/mol, and
[Ca 2ϩ]0 ϭ 2 mM.
The intracellular Ca 2ϩ concentration was updated based on Ca 2ϩ
currents and pump,

d ͓ Ca2ϩ͔i/dt ϭ Ϫ5.1819 ϫ 10Ϫ5 ICa/DCa ϩ ͑2.4 ϫ 10Ϫ4 Ϫ ͓Ca2ϩ͔i͒␶Ca,
(4)
where ␶Ca ϭ 300 ms and DCa ϭ 0.85. The gating variables 0 Յ m(t), h(t)
Յ1 satisfied

˙ ϭ ͓ m ϱ ͑ V ͒ Ϫ m ͔ / ␶ m͑V͒,
m

Figure 2. Simulated spindle oscillations. A, Voltage traces of individual neurons [PY (cortical
pyramidal), TC (thalamocortical), and RE (reticular thalamic)] in each layer of the thalamocortical network during a 50 s simulation of spindle activity. B, Space–time plot representing the
activity of the whole network for 25 s, showing the pattern of wave propagation within the
network. Individual membrane potential activity from A corresponds to the cell in the middle of
each respective layer (Cell #50 of TC, RE, and PY) of B. The value of the membrane potential for
each neuron is coded by the false color scale. C, Enlargement for 350 ms of the space plot in B
showing a spontaneous initiation of a spindle cycle. A small subset of PY cells accounted for the
genesis of the cycle (black arrow), and RE cells were then recruited. TC cells exhibited far less
bursting than RE cells at the beginning of this spindle sequence, and the level of synchrony was
lower than that for the middle phase of a sequence.
current. A hyperpolarization-activated cation current, Ih, was also included in TC cells (McCormick and Pape, 1990; Destexhe et al., 1996).
The equations and parameters for the ion channels and intracellular
calcium dynamics used in this model were taken from Bazhenov et al.
(2000, 2002), as summarized below, with the exception of the maximal
conductance for Ih, which was varied from gh ϭ 0.02 mS/cm 2 to 0.009
mS/cm 2.
The cortical PY and IN cell models included a fast Na ϩ current, INa,
with a high density in the axosomatic compartment and a low density in
the dendritic compartment. A fast delayed rectifier K ϩ current, IK, was
present in the axosomatic compartment and persistent Na ϩ current,
INa(P), was included in the axosomatic and dendritic compartments (Alzheimer et al., 1993; Kay et al., 1998). A slow voltage-dependent noninac-

h˙ ϭ ͓hϱ ͑V͒ Ϫ h͔/␶h͑V͒,

(5)

where a dot implies the time derivative and mϱ( V), hϱ( V), ␶ϱ( V) are
nonlinear functions of V derived from experimental recordings of ionic
currents, which can be found in Bazhenov et al. (2000).
Network geometry and simulation. The thalamocortical model consisted of 325 cells segregated in a four-layer array of 100 PYs, REs, and
TCs, and 25 INs (see Fig. 1C). Similar to previously studied network
configurations, the intrathalamic and intracortical connections in the
model were local and topographically organized, following a stochastic
distribution of synaptic weights. Synaptic connections for PY cells included AMPA and NMDA receptors. Connections from TC to RE neurons had AMPA receptors, and connections from RE to TC neurons had
GABAA and GABAB receptors. Corticothalamic and thalamocortical
connections were wider and mediated by AMPA; corticothalamic connections with AMPA receptors were stronger in reticular neurons than in
relay cells.
Postsynaptic receptors were modeled with a simplified first-order kinetic scheme of binding and unbinding of a neurotransmitter described
by instantaneous rise and exponential decay of synaptic conductances
(Destexhe et al., 1994b). The values for the maximal conductances (for
each synapse) were taken from Bazhenov et al. (2002) and listed in detail
therein. The total synaptic strengths from the cortex to the thalamus
(feedback) and from the thalamus to the cortex (feedforward) were varied over a range of values (see Results for more details). These maximal
synaptic conductances were divided by the number of synapses targeting
a given cell to determine the unitary conductances. AMPAergic synapses
between PYs included short-term depression with a constant of U ϭ
0.073 per action potential and exponential recovery and a time constant
of ␶ ϭ 700 ms (Tsodyks and Markram, 1997). The spontaneous synaptic
activity was modeled by Poisson-distributed synaptic events at dendrites
of all PY neurons and interneurons.
Reduction of calcium upregulation. The model for the hyperpolarizationactivated cation current, Ih, in the TC neurons was taken from McCormick and

Bonjean et al. • Control of Sleep Spindles Duration In Vivo

J. Neurosci., June 22, 2011 • 31(25):9124 –9134 • 9127

A

B

C

D

The Ca 2ϩ dependence was based on higherorder kinetics: The binding of Ca 2ϩ molecules
with an unbound form of the regulation factor
P0 led to the bound form of P1. Then, P1 bound
to the open state of channel O that produced
the locked form OL:

k1
P 0 ϩ 2Ca N P 1 ,
k2

k3
OϩP 1 N O L,
k4
(7)

Both open and locked states of the channels
contributed to the h-current,

I h ϭ gmax͓͑O͔ ϩ k͓OL͔͒͑V Ϫ Eh͒,

F

E

G

H

Figure 3. Network mechanisms leading to spindle termination. A, Membrane potentials of TC and RE cells during a 10 s
simulation of spindles generated in the thalamic model in absence of the cortex. One occurrence of a spindle sequence with
waxing-and-waning properties was initiated by an external stimulation to the RE network. B, The [Ca 2ϩ]i influence on h-type
current conductance (upregulation) was reduced by ϳ55% compared to the value used in A, below the threshold that terminates
spindles. The oscillation became continuous. C, The cortical network was added to the model used in B. The total synaptic strength
of cortical feedback per cell was identical to the value used in Figure 2 A and was sufficient to elicit synchronization of the network
but unable to cause spindle termination in presence of a weak Ca 2ϩ upregulation. D, Radii of the corticothalamic (PY3 TC) and
thalamocortical (TC3 PY) afferent projections were doubled from the value used in C. Keeping Ca 2ϩ upregulation low caused a
few spontaneous spindle terminations to occur sporadically, but the duration of spindles remained excessively long. E, The total
synaptic strength of cortical feedback per cell (PY3{TC,RE}) was doubled from the strength level used in C, while the radius of
cortical afferents was the same as that in D. A few spindle epochs are apparent with evidence of a waxing-and-waning pattern
(mostly at the beginning of the simulation). F, The total synaptic strength of cortical feedback per cell was quadrupled compared
to the value used in C, while the radius of cortical afferents was kept constant from D. The waxing-and-waning envelope of the
spindle has shape and duration comparable to the simulation in Figure 2. This demonstrates that a sufficiently strong cortical
feedback coupled to a weak Ca 2ϩ upregulation was sufficient for spindle termination and could control the duration of each
spindle sequence. G, Membrane potential traces of PY, TC, and RE neurons during a typical waxing-and-waning spindle sequence
obtained from a simulation using parameters as described for F. Compare this panel with in vivo data from Figure 1 A. H, Statistical
comparison of modeling and in vivo data: Left, frequency; right, average spindle sequence duration (1 and 2) and average interspindle interval duration (1* and 2*). All differences are statistically nonsignificant, showing that the modeling results agree well
with in vivo data.
Pape (1990) and included both voltage and Ca 2ϩ dependencies (Destexhe
et al., 1996). The voltage dependence followed first-order kinetics for
transitions between closed ( C) and open ( O) states of the channels without inactivation:

␣
C N O,
␤

(6)

where ␣( V) and ␤( V) are the voltage-dependent transition rates [see
Huguenard and McCormick (1992) and McCormick and Pape (1990)
for the equations of ␣( V) and ␤( V)].

(8)

where Eh ϭ Ϫ40 mV and k is a parameter that
was varied to modulate the contribution of
Ca 2ϩ dependence to the strength of the current. Initially, we set k ϭ 2.0 based on previous
studies [see Destexhe et al. (1996), in which
there was a strong [Ca 2ϩ]i dependence on the
channel dynamics]. This parameter was progressively reduced to the value k ϭ 0.9, because
we observed at this value a transition in the
spindling dynamics to continous spindle-like
activity. The fractions of the channels in the
open [O] and locked [OL] forms were calculated according to Equations 6 and 7 (where
k1 ϭ 2.5 ϫ 10 7 mM Ϫ4 ms Ϫ1, k2 ϭ 4 ϫ 10 Ϫ4
ms Ϫ1, k3 ϭ 0.1 ms Ϫ1, and k4 ϭ 0.001 ms Ϫ1 are
the rate constants).
Data analysis. All simulations were performed using custom Cϩϩ code that implemented a fourth-order Runge–Kutta
integration method with a time step of 0.02
ms. The source code was compiled using
GCC compilers. Modeling data were analyzed, processed, and displayed using MATLAB R14 (MathWorks). Data obtained in
vivo were analyzed using IGOR Pro
(WaveMetrics).

Results

A typical in vivo intracellular recording of
a sleep spindle in the cat, shown in Figure
1A, has three distinct phases: (1) a waxing
(beginning) phase; (2) a middle (main)
phase; and (3) a waning (end) phase
(Timofeev et al., 2001; Timofeev and Bazhenov, 2005).
In the waxing phase, spindles started
with a series of IPSPs in TC (thalamocortical relay) neurons, but these IPSPs were
not followed by rebound spike bursts in
TC cells (Fig. 1 Ai). In the middle phase of
the spindle epoch, rebound bursts and
Na ϩ spikes cyclically recurred in many TC cells due to the mutual
interaction between RE and TC cells (Fig. 1Aii). These rebound
spike bursts in TC neurons excited both RE and cortical neurons.
In this phase, the firing of cortical, RE, and TC neurons were
phase locked.
Finally, the waning phase of the oscillation and its termination
were characterized by less regular spiking of thalamic and cortical
neurons (Fig. 1 Aiii). In vitro, the primary mechanism underlying
the waning phase has been tied to the upregulation of the non-

Bonjean et al. • Control of Sleep Spindles Duration In Vivo

9128 • J. Neurosci., June 22, 2011 • 31(25):9124 –9134

specific h-type current, Ih. Intracellular
calcium concentration ([Ca 2ϩ]i) increases in TC cells during spindles because
of Ca 2ϩ entry through several types of
Ca 2ϩ channels, primarily low-threshold
Ca 2ϩ channels [Fig. 1 B(1)]. An increase
of [Ca 2ϩ]i causes a shift in the activation
curve of Ih [Fig. 1 B(2)]. Progressive increase of [Ca 2ϩ]i in TC cells during spindles leads to a persistent Ih activation that
depolarizes TC cells and may inactivate
the low- threshold Ca 2ϩ current, IT, during the late phases of a spindle sequence
(Bal and McCormick, 1996; Budde et al.,
1997; Lu¨thi and McCormick, 1998a).
We used a combination of modeling,
juxtacellular, and dual intracellular recordings to explore the possible involvement of the cerebral cortex in spindle
initiation and termination in vivo.

A

B

C

D

The model reproduces waxing-andwaning spindle oscillations
The thalamocortical network model
based on Bazhenov et al. (2002) reproduced the basic properties of spindle oscillations (Fig. 1C). On average, six
recurring isolated spindle sequences
on spindle pattern. A, Spindle pattern generation for a range of corticothacould be identified from the voltage traces Figure 4. Differential impact of cortical feedback2ϩ
lamic conductances (PY3 TC and PY3 RE). The Ca upregulation was low and kept constant in all simulations. Three qualitaof individual model neurons during a 50 s tively distinct regions (Region I, isolated; Region II, continuous; Region III, repetitive) of spindle pattern activity can be
simulation, an example of which is shown distinguished depending on the strength of the cortical feedback. A typical pattern behavior of the TC membrane potential
in Figure 2A. The spindles showed typical illustrates each of these regions. The borders separating these regions depended on several factors, and the solid lines are
waxing-and-waning deflection of the smoothed and stylized. B, Total spindling time shown in false color for a range of corticothalamic conductance strengths. Compare
membrane potential accompanied with to the three regions identified in A. C, Inter-spindle duration in false color, averaged across each simulation, for each point in the
rebound spike bursts in the simulated diagram of corticothalamic conductance strengths. The longest and shortest inter-spindle durations occurred for isolated spindle patterns
voltage traces of TC neurons (Fig. 2 A, TC and nonterminating oscillations at spindle frequency, respectively. D. Generation of spindle pattern for a range of synaptic conductances
trace). The waning phase in the model was (feedforwardTC3 PY/INandfeedbackPY3 TC).Thethalamocortical(TC3 PY/IN)feedforwardconnectionstrengthsstronglyinfluence
mediated by the Ca 2ϩ-dependent up- spindle pattern. Repetitive spindle patterns were observed only for a narrow range of connection strengths.
regulation of Ih, which led to the depolarmechanisms of spontaneous cortical firing would lead to the
ization of TC neurons and terminated the oscillation. Immediately
same effect. Powerful bursts in RE cells, which received the
following termination, [Ca 2ϩ]i remained elevated in TC cells. This restrongest cortical input, led to hyperpolarization and rebound
sidual upregulation of Ih determined the inter-spindle lull duration durbursts in some TC cells. These TC afferents then activated
ing which the thalamic network failed to initiate new spindles despite
more PY neurons, which in turn recruited a larger number of RE
cortical drive.
and TC neurons. After a few cycles, the entire thalamocortical netThe spindles also appeared in an isolated thalamus model,
work was engaged in the spindle sequence, much more quickly than
consistent with in vitro findings. The synchrony of spindle oscilin models of the isolated thalamus, in which spindles propagate
lations was, however, reduced. Adding cortical feedback to the
slowly by local thalamic recruitment (Destexhe et al., 1996).
thalamic model enhanced the temporal and spatial synchronizaLarge-scale synchrony was achieved within a few hundreds of
tions of spindle discharges within the network, in agreement with
milliseconds because of the wide radius of the corticothalamic
in vivo and modeling studies (Contreras et al., 1996; Destexhe et
inputs in the thalamus, consistent with in vivo observations of
al., 1998). The global phase-locked synchrony between PY, TC,
near simultaneous spindling over widespread cortical and thaand RE cell populations was apparent on spatiotemporal maps
lamic areas (Contreras et al., 1996, 1997). The corticothalamic
(Fig. 2 B).
feedback was also effective in increasing the global synchrony of
TC rebounds and decreasing the local jitter of TC bursts during
Cortical mini-EPSPs may initiate spindle oscillations
the middle phase of spindle activity. Invariantly, the firing of
In the spatiotemporal maps, the spindle wave originated from
cortical neurons initiated spindle sequences.
PY and RE cells (Figs. 2 B, C). Thus, cortical volleys were a
Once initiated by cortical discharge, the spindles were suspowerful trigger for spindle initiation in the thalamus. In the
tained through reciprocal interactions between TC and RE
model, each spindle sequence started by a random summation
neurons by means of the interplay between Ih and IT currents
of spontaneous mini-EPSPs that triggered spikes in one or a
in TC cells. As in a previous thalamic model (Destexhe et al.,
small number of PY neurons (Fig. 2C). These PY cells in turn
1996), a burst of spikes in RE neurons led to the hyperpolarrecruited RE and TC cells through corticothalamic projecization of TC cells, which deinactivated the low-threshold
tions, as in previous models (Destexhe et al., 1998). Other

Bonjean et al. • Control of Sleep Spindles Duration In Vivo

J. Neurosci., June 22, 2011 • 31(25):9124 –9134 • 9129

became continuous at the spindle frequency (ϳ10 Hz) because the Ca 2ϩ upregulation of Ih was no longer able to
terminate the spindle (Fig. 3B). This
threshold value of [Ca 2ϩ]i dependence of
Ih current was used as the new baseline
value for all subsequent simulations.
We then investigated the effects of cortical afferents on the duration and the pattern
of these nonterminating sequences. Weak
and topographically limited cortical afferents, as found in Bazhenov et al. (2002), only
marginally affected persistent thalamocortical oscillation (Fig. 3C). In this configuration, a cortical presence did not contribute
to the termination of the oscillatory activity.
These results would appear to support
the upregulation of the h-type channel as
the main factor underlying spindle termination. However, when the radii of the
thalamocortical (feedforward) and corticothalamic (feedback) afferents were doubled,
leaving the total synaptic strength per cell
unaffected, (1) the continuous oscillation
was disrupted, and (2) sporadic terminations occurred (Fig. 3D). Although this oscillation had an abnormally long duration,
the waxing-and-waning pattern of the spindle oscillation reappeared sporadically.
When the total strength of corticothalamic
Figure 5. IPSP-triggeredanalysisofspindlesinthemodel.TracesarealignedbyminimaofTCcellvoltage(arrows)toshowthatcortical synaptic input from both TC and RE neupopulation activity is phase locked with TC neurons for each cycle of the spindle oscillation during the middle phase of a spindle. A, Middle rons was doubled and the radius of cortical
phaseofaspindle.B,Waningphase(end)ofaspindle.C,RasterplotsofTCandPYspikescorrespondingtotheactivityinA,showingthatTC afferents was also doubled, the temporal
andPYactivitiesarephaselockedinthemiddleofaspindlesequence.D,RasterplotsofTCandPYspikescorrespondingtotheactivityinB, segregation of the resulting oscillatory seshowing that TC and PY activities are more desynchronized at the end of a spindle sequence.
quences was improved (Fig. 3E), and the
waxing-and-waning of the spindle sequence
Ca 2ϩ T-channels. Released from the IPSPs, TC neurons probecame clearly identifiable at the beginning of the simulation.
duced a low-threshold Ca 2ϩ spike (LTS) rebound crowned by Na ϩ
If changing the synaptic connection strengths can cause a disrupspikes. This rebound burst in TC neurons then triggered another
tion of the oscillation, then further increasing the strengths might
burst in RE cells and firing of cortical neurons, starting another cycle.
lead to a regime in which cortical feedback can control spindle termination. Indeed, when the total synaptic strength per corticothaCorticothalamic feedback mediates spindle termination with
lamic cell was quadrupled compared to control, five well segregated
weak calcium upregulation
spindle sequences of finite duration were obtained, interleaved with
Do corticothalamic neurons also participate in terminating spindle
subthreshold oscillations (Fig. 3F). Thus, despite weak Ca 2ϩ upsequences together with the Ca 2ϩ-dependent upregulation mecharegulation, spindle epochs were well segregated and became similar
nism? We investigated the role of corticothalamic feedback in
to in vivo recordings in frequency, duration, and shape. A typical
spindle termination to determine whether corticothalamic
voltage trace for each cell type in the simulation with a temporal scale
feedback could terminate the oscillation when the Ih upregusimilar to that in Figure 1A is displayed in Figure 3G. Sequence
lation failed to do so.
duration, inter-spindle lull, and waxing-and-waning properties of
In the absence of cortical input to the model, only one spindle
the oscillation were comparable to that observed experimentally in
sequence was initiated by a brief external stimulus of the thalavivo (Fig. 3H). The following compares the model versus in vivo
mus (at t ϭ 1500 ms) (Fig. 3A). The duration of the spindle in the
values: frequency, 9.43 Ϯ 0.98 versus 10.15 Ϯ 1.12 Hz (p Ͼ 0.1,
isolated thalamus increased to 3.66 Ϯ 0.84 from 2.67 Ϯ 0.79 s in
n.s.);
average spindle duration, 2.67 Ϯ 0.79 versus 2.06 Ϯ 0.99 s
the network with intact corticothalamic feedback. Although in(n.s.);
inter-spindle interval: 4.36 Ϯ 0.78 versus 4.88 Ϯ 1.04 s
dividual traces of neurons appeared to be phase locked, the spa(n.s.). Ca 2ϩ upregulation was itself unable, ceteris paribus, to
tiotemporal pattern of spindle activity changed substantially. In
cause spindle waning unless a moderately strong corticothathe absence of the cortical feedback, the oscillation was a traveling
lamic feedback (measured by a relatively large radius and a
wave that propagated from the site of initiation through local
high conductance strength) was applied, which supports the
connectivity between thalamic RE and TC neurons (data not
involvement of cortical feedback in the waning and terminashown).
tion of spindle sequences. Cortical feedback also enhanced
Reducing the [Ca 2ϩ]i dependence of Ih decreased the upreguboth large-scale spatial and temporal synchronizations of
lation and led to a spindle of longer duration. When the [Ca 2ϩ]i
dependence was reduced to 55% of the baseline, the oscillation
spindles in the model.

9130 • J. Neurosci., June 22, 2011 • 31(25):9124 –9134

Bonjean et al. • Control of Sleep Spindles Duration In Vivo

Relative impact of corticothalamic
B
A
feedback on RE and TC neurons
Knowing that cortical feedback can mediate
spindle termination and duration, we systematically investigated whether the relative
strengths of cortical feedback onto TC cells
and RE cells had a differential impact on
spindle patterns. A total of 625 different
spindle sequences were simulated in the
model with the low upregulation of Ih, and
the results are summarized on a space-time
diagram (Fig. 4A). These simulations were
obtained under different combinations of
parameters, where the maximal conducC
D
tances for corticothalamic ( gPY3 TC) and
corticoreticular ( gPY3 RE) synapses were independently varied from low (5 ⅐ 10 Ϫ6 and
10 Ϫ6 mS, respectively) to high (10 Ϫ4 and 5 ⅐
10 Ϫ3 mS, respectively). In so doing, three
qualitative distinct regions of oscillatory activity were observed, herein referred to as
follows: (1) “isolated spindle”; (2) “continuous oscillation”; and (3) “repetitive
spindles.”
The isolated spindle region was defined
by only a single spindle sequence occurring
E
during the 50 s simulation. With stronger
cortical synaptic inputs onto TC cells and
weaker inputs onto RE cells, the network
had a low probability to spontaneously generate a spindle sequence; the cortical feedback failed to recruit enough RE cells to
entrain a repetitive pattern of oscillation. A
single isolated spindle sequence was then
followed by a period of quiescence (Fig. 4A,
Region I). The continuous oscillation region was characterized by the presence of
nonterminating oscillations at spindle frequency (ϳ10 Hz) that were not temporally Figure 6. Firing distribution triggered by IPSP in model TC neurons. A, B, Time lag between TC and PY cells firing during the
segmented and neither waned nor termi- middle of a spindle (A) and during the waning phase (B). The envelope of the histogram in B has a lower amplitude and a wider
distribution than that in A, suggesting great variance in the time lag differences between the IPSP before the TC burst and the onset
nated. These nonterminating oscillations of a spike in an afferent PY cell. The synchronization between cortical and thalamic cells during the middle of a spindle epoch is
appeared when the cortical feedback greater than during the waning phase. C, D, Time lag between TC cells during the middle of a spindle (C) and during the waning
onto TC cells was too weak to induce a phase (D). The red bars show the mean values of the histogram in ( A) and ( B), respectively. The envelope of the histograms in A and
waning of the oscillation (Fig. 4 A, Re- B are superimposed in gray in C and D, respectively. E, Bar plot of mean time lag differences. There was a significant difference
gion II). Finally, the repetitive spindle between the means for A (91.2 Ϯ 14.8) and B (114.3 Ϯ 20.2) (p Ͻ 0.005) (left), but there was no significant difference between
region was characterized by several the means for C (87.1 Ϯ 38.2) and D (81.5 Ϯ 35.3) (right).
spindle sequences of finite duration, interleaved by periods of quiescence and exhibiting all of the
We then explored the effects of changing the synaptic
properties of spindle oscillations that occurred only when the
strength of the feedforward TC projections on spindle duraactivity of cortical inputs to both TC and RE cells were above a
tion. Using the same simulation parameters as the control
threshold shown in (Fig. 4 A, Region III).
condition, 625 simulations lasting 50 s each were generated
The total spindle duration for each simulation (Fig. 4 B)
independently varying the strengths of corticothalamic
and the average inter-spindle lull duration (Fig. 4C) also de( gPY3 TC) and thalamocortical ( gTC3PY) inputs. Regions with
isolated, continuous, and repetitive spindling were identified
pended on the strengths of the cortical synaptic feedback onto
(Fig. 4 D). As in previous simulations, strong cortical feedback
TC and RE cells, and three regions could be identified correwas required to terminate the spindle. When either gTC3 PC/IN
sponding to the qualitatively distinct regions previously deor gPY3TC inputs were weak, there were nonterminating oscilscribed. The isolated spindle region had the shortest total
lations at ϳ10 Hz (Fig. 4 D, Region II). The generation of
spindle duration (Fig. 4B) and the longest average inter-spindle
biologically plausible recurrent spindle sequences only ocduration (Fig. 4C). In contrast, the continuous oscillation region had
curred when both the feedforward and feedback connection
the longest total spindle duration (Fig. 4B) and the shortest average
strengths were strong (Fig. 4 D, Region III). Further increasing
inter-spindle duration (Fig. 4C). Intermediate durations of both
the strengths of these projections led to solitary, isolated spinspindle sequence and inter-spindle interval characterized the repetdles (Fig. 4 D, Region I).
itive spindle region (Figs. 4B,C).

Bonjean et al. • Control of Sleep Spindles Duration In Vivo

A

J. Neurosci., June 22, 2011 • 31(25):9124 –9134 • 9131

B

C

Figure 7. Action potential firing in neurons from motor cortex (area 4) during spindles. A, Example of typical simultaneous field
potentials and juxtacellular recordings (bottom traces) illustrating bursting at termination of spindles compared to EEG recordings
(top traces). The shaded box on the juxtacellular trace is expanded below. B, Histograms of spikes count occurring 1000 ms (bins of
5 ms) around spindles onset (top) and waning (bottom). Note that spikes count is higher at termination than at onset. C, Proportion
of neurons that fire at spindle termination: 86.36% (white area) had unchanged firing rate, while 9.09% (gray area) increased their
firing rate without bursting and 4.55% (black area) increased their firing rate while bursting.

Corticothalamic feedback contributes to spindle termination
by desynchronizing of thalamic neurons
The relative timing of the bursting of TC and PY cells within a single
spindle sequence may provide insights into spindle termination. A
spindle epoch has three phases: waxing, middle, and waning
(Timofeev et al., 2001; Timofeev and Bazhenov, 2005). The spike
distributions between thalamic and cortical cells were analyzed during the middle and waning phases. The middle phase of a spindle
epoch was defined as a period of relatively stable distribution of TC
membrane voltage (ϳ Ϫ79.17 mV) at the minima between bursts,
whereas the waning phase lasted from the first significant depolarization of the minimum membrane voltage between bursts
(ϾϪ75.8 mV) to the end of bursting (cf. Fig. 1A). The activity of
cortical neurons was less synchronized and less periodic during the
waning phase than the middle phase. In event-triggered averages
aligned by minima of thalamic neuron membrane potential, cortical
(PY) population activity was phase locked with TC neurons during
the middle phase of a spindle epoch (Fig. 5A,C) but became more
desynchronized during the waning phase (Fig. 5B,D).
We calculated the time lags between cortical activity and TC
membrane potential.
Time lags were calculated as the delay between a wave minimum
of TC membrane potential (maximum of IPSP) and the occurrence
of the following PY spike for the middle (Fig. 6A) and waning phases
(Fig. 6B). The histogram of the time lags for PY spikes was charac-

terized by (1) shorter latencies and (2) a significantly smaller standard deviation for
spikes occurring during the middle phase of
the spindle epoch (Fig. 6A) compared to
spikes fired during the waning phase (Fig.
6B, mean Ϯ SD: 91.2 Ϯ 14.8 vs 114.3 Ϯ
20.2, p Ͻ 0.005). The cortical activity became irregular during the waning phase
compared to the middle phase, with a distribution of time lags during waning phase
ϳ25% wider than the middle phase.
Similar time lags were calculated between wave minima of TC membrane
potential and the occurrence of a rebound spike in the same TC cell for the
middle (Fig. 6C) and waning phases
(Fig. 6 D). In contrast to the distribution
of cortical firing with the same time reference (Fig. 6 A, B), there was no significant difference between the middle and
waning phases (mean Ϯ SD: 87.1 Ϯ 38.2
vs 81.5 Ϯ 35.3, n.s., p Ͼ 0.05), confirming that the firing of thalamic cells
generally preserves its regularity
throughout the spindle sequence. The
statistical analysis is summarized in Figure 6 E.
We conclude that during the waning
phase of a spindle, the asynchronous firing
of cortical neurons imposes a steady depolarization on TC neurons, preventing the
deinactivation of IT and, therefore, inhibiting the generation of rebound bursts. This
shows that cortical asynchronous firing (1)
begins before the termination of spindles, and (2) contributes to or triggers
the termination of spindles generated in
the thalamus.

Role of corticothalamic feedback in spindle termination
in vivo
Our model predicted that the precision of neuronal firing is a
critical parameter for spindle progression; therefore, we performed juxtacellular recordings in the motor (n ϭ 22) area of the
neocortex that neither shunted currents nor affected the firing
rates. Spikes were counted around the initiation and termination
of spindles. An example of electrophysiological recordings of a
neuron (located at a cortical depth of 2000 ␮m) that fired bursts
of action potentials at spindle termination is shown in Figure 7A.
There was a higher incidence of spikes at the termination of spindles compared to their initiation (Fig. 7B). Of the 22 neurons
recorded, three of them (13.64%) showed a higher incidence of
firing at spindle termination, and among these, one was found to
burst (4.55%). An increase of the cortical firing rate that is desynchronized with respect to thalamic activity is likely to terminate the
spindle. Although such an increase was not a necessary condition for
spindle termination in the model, we also observed slightly increased
firing rates in a few but not in a majority of the neurons. In the
model, desynchronization of cortical firing, even with no increase of
the firing rate, was sufficient to terminate spindles.
To further test the prediction of the model that a decrease of
thalamocortical synchronization contributes to the termination
of spindle events, simultaneous dual intracellular recordings

Bonjean et al. • Control of Sleep Spindles Duration In Vivo

9132 • J. Neurosci., June 22, 2011 • 31(25):9124 –9134

cells rarely exhibited rebound spike bursts. These results confirm
the predictions of the model and support the hypothesis that
cortically driven depolarization of TC cells during the waning
phase of a spindle prevents rebound burst generation in thalamic
neurons.

A

Discussion
It is generally thought that sleep spindles are generated in the
thalamus, which then recruits cortical circuits. The evidence
presented here, from both intracellular and extracellular unit
recordings of cortical and thalamic neurons and from
thalamocortical models, gives the cortex a more central role in
initiating spindles through corticothalamic AMPA-mediated
synaptic feedback to RE cells and in terminating spindle
through feedback to TC cells.

B

C1

C2

Figure 8. Thalamocortical synchronization at the early, middle, and late portions of
spindles in motor cortex and thalamus. A, Simultaneous intracellular recordings during
spindles from area 4 of the motor cortex (blue) and the VL nucleus of the thalamus (red).
Top trace, Local field potential from motor cortical area 4. Middle trace, Intracellular
recording from the same cortical area. Bottom trace, Intracellular recording from the
corresponding thalamic VL nucleus. Note that at spindle onset, the thalamocortical neuron exhibits rhythmic IPSPs without rebound action potentials, and the cortical neuron
does not show rhythmic EPSPs. B, Expanded from A as indicated by the horizontal line.
During waxing but not waning phases, the cortical neuron has rhythmic depolarizing
potentials in synchrony with oscillations in the thalamocortical neuron. C1, Superposition
of segments of local field potentials and intracellular activities of cortical and thalamocortical neurons during an early phase of spindles. Zero time is set at the maximal hyperpolarization achieved by thalamocortical neurons during a particular cycle of spindle
(vertical line). C2, The same arrangement as in C1 but for the waxing phase of the spindle,
showing desynchronization between thalamic and cortical firing.

(Contreras and Steriade, 1995; Contreras et al., 1996; Timofeev et
al., 1996) were performed from thalamic relay neurons (VL nucleus) and cortical cells (motor cortex) during spindle activity
(n ϭ 7). In these recordings, TC neurons never displayed rebound spike bursts at the initiation of a spindle sequence— defined as the first IPSP in TC neurons (Fig. 8 A). The first rebound
spike in TC cells usually occurred after the fourth or fifth IPSP. In
cortical neurons, the first EPSPs in a spindle epoch were recorded
only when TC neurons started to fire rebound spikes during the
middle phase (Fig. 8 A, B). At the end of a spindle sequence, the
cortical neurons became more depolarized and some started to
fire more action potentials, most likely due to recurrent cortical
excitation. In these recordings during the waning phase of the
spindle oscillation: (1) the cortical firing was no longer phaselocked with the IPSPs in TC neurons (Fig. 8C); (2) the overall
hyperpolarization level of TC neurons was reduced; and (3) TC

Mechanisms for spindle initiation
This study supports the hypothesis that the cortex is actively involved in the initiation of spindle sequences, consistent with the
mechanism proposed by Destexhe et al. (1998). In the model, the
spontaneous spiking of PY cells triggered bursts of spikes in RE
cells at spindle onset. When the cortical feedback to RE cells was
reduced, external thalamic stimulation was required to initiate a
spindle and the thalamic network was unable to sustain repetitive
spindle activity on its own. Cortical feedback was also critical
during the first few cycles of normal spindle oscillations when the
involvement of TC cells was minimal. Later in the spindle progression, the thalamic network alone could only sustain the oscillation when many TC cells were active.
When an input to the thalamus was sufficiently strong, powerful bursts could be triggered in RE cells, and an immediate LTS
response in TC neurons could initiate a spindle sequence even
without cortical involvement. However, early cortical involvement was essential for spindle progression when there were only
relatively weak bursts in the RE cells during the waxing phase of
the spindle and the responses of TC cells were minimal.
Mechanisms for spindle termination
The presence of waning at the end of a spindle, followed by its termination in the deafferented thalamus, supports the idea that the
thalamus has properties that can sufficiently mediate spindle termination. This hypothesis has also been supported by computational studies in which the strength of thalamocortical
feedback was usually kept weak, leading to a dominant—if not
exclusive—role of the aforementioned Ca 2ϩ-dependent upregulating mechanism (Destexhe et al., 1998; Bazhenov et al.,
2000). Based on in vitro studies, it has been proposed that the
progressive depolarization undergone by TC cells during a
spindle sequence— caused by an activation shift of Ih toward
more depolarized potentials (McCormick and Pape, 1990)—
prevents TC neurons from reaching a sufficient level of hyperpolarization required to deinactivate IT, thus mediating the
termination of spindles.
In vivo studies have suggested, however, that cortical feedback
may significantly shorten spindle duration and possibly contribute to its termination (Timofeev et al., 2001). In our model, weak
Ca 2ϩ upregulation of Ih channels was unable by itself to terminate spindle sequences but nonetheless reduced the strength of
TC rebounds, leading to larger spike delays and less synchronous
spiking in all cortical cells during the last phase of a spindle. The
influence of the neocortex on spindle termination depended both
on the strengths and patterns of connectivity in the thalamocortical and corticothalamic projections and was primarily mediated

Bonjean et al. • Control of Sleep Spindles Duration In Vivo

by the desynchronizing impact of cortical spikes on thalamic
relay neurons. The spiking activities in the cortex and the thalamus were phase locked during the middle part of the spindle, but
as the spindle waned the cortical activity fell out of step with
activity in the thalamus. This desynchronization between thalamic and cortical structures caused the cortical feedback to depolarize both RE and TC neurons, which prevented the
deinactivation of the low threshold T-type Ca 2ϩ channels in TC
cells normally involved in spindle generation and eventually led
to the termination of the spindle sequence.
Simultaneous intracellular recordings from the thalamus and
the neocortex further confirmed the prediction from the model
regarding the loss of coordinated TC spiking during waning.
Both our computational and in vivo data therefore provide compelling evidence that corticothalamic input effectively desynchronizes the thalamic network during waning and indeed
contributes to termination. In conclusion, our model predicts
that spindle termination depends on both Ih upregulation and
corticothalamic feedback.
Dual role of cortical synchronization and desynchronization
Although cortical feedback may contribute to spindle termination
by desynchronization, this is not its unique function. We have also
shown that cortical inputs initiate spindles (Fig. 2C) consistent with
experimental results (Steriade et al., 1972; Contreras and Steriade,
1996) and previous computational studies (Destexhe et al., 1998).
We have also found that cortical feedback can enhance synchronization during the middle phase, when the TC-PY discharges are
phase-locked (Figs. 5A,C, 6, 8C1).
These conclusions are consistent with previous experimental
reports on the role of corticothalamic volleys in the synchronizing spindles (Contreras and Steriade, 1996; Contreras et al., 1996,
1997; Destexhe et al., 1998), and thus cortical feedback may have
a dual role in synchronizing and desynchronizing spindles. In our
model, the thalamo-corticothalamic loop synchronized spindles
when thalamocortical input was strong (i.e., during the middle
phase of spindle), but then became desynchronizing when rebound bursts in TC cells were weakened as a result of the membrane voltage depolarization—and associated with this
inactivation of IT—triggered by even weak Ih upregulation near
the end of the spindle epoch.
Functional role of sleep spindles: implications of our study
Sleep spindles have been linked to synaptic plasticity and memory
consolidation (Steriade and Timofeev, 2003). Because there is no
other sleep oscillation that has been linked to a wider spectrum of
cognitive, physiological, and pathological processes than spindles,
the possible involvement of the neocortex in actively regulating spindle duration has far reaching implications.
There is a growing literature on how different phases of
sleep may affect the consolidation of different types of memories (Born and Fehm, 1998; Stickgold, 2005). Sleep spindle
density has been found to be positively correlated with performance on various psychometric scales for intelligence assessment (Bo´dizs et al., 2005; Schabus et al., 2006; Fogel et al.,
2007) and has also been positively correlated with different
forms of memory retention (Gais et al., 2002; Clemens et al.,
2005). In rodents, induction of long-term potentiation (LTP)
causes increased reliability of evoked sleep spindles (Werk et
al., 2005) and, conversely, sleep spindle-like activity can produce LTP in preparations of rat somatosensory cortex in vitro
(Rosanova and Ulrich, 2005). Similarly, in vivo studies have
demonstrated that sleep spindle density increased following

J. Neurosci., June 22, 2011 • 31(25):9124 –9134 • 9133

reward learning in rats (Eschenko et al., 2006). Spindles are
not only present during stage 2 of non-rapid eye movement
(nonREM) sleep, but also occur during deeper stages of non-REM
sleep [slow-wave sleep (SWS), stages 3 and 4] in concomitance with
the slow oscillation. As such, they may be involved in hippocampalneocortical dialogue, which takes place during SWS (Siapas and Wilson, 1998) and could be important for sleep-dependent memory
consolidation (Fogel et al., 2010).
The exact mechanisms by which spindles and sleep oscillations in general participate in memory consolidation remain
largely elusive (Sejnowski and Destexhe, 2000; Tononi and Cirelli, 2003) because of several independent mechanisms facilitating
TC responses during stimulation in the spindle frequency range.
In vivo and computational studies (Bazhenov et al., 1998b; Steriade et al., 1998; Houweling et al., 2002; Timofeev et al., 2002)
found that spindle activity could induce an augmentation of neocortical responses and may have a profound impact on intracellular and synaptic plasticity. Massive Ca 2ϩ entry in cortical
pyramidal neurons during spindle oscillations may activate the
molecular “gate” mediated by protein kinase A, thus opening the
door for gene expression over hours (Sejnowski and Destexhe,
2000). Spindles in the prefrontal cortex are coordinated with
sharp waves in the hippocampus (Siapas and Wilson, 1998),
which raises further questions about the nature of the
hippocampal-neocortical dialogue and memory consolidation.
This study explored some of the neural mechanisms possibly
taking part in these changes.
Conclusion
Spindle oscillations are a complex dance that arise from interactions between neurons in the thalamus and cortex: (1) initiation
of spindle sequence depends on random activities of cortical PY
neurons, which recruit bursts in RE cells; (2) very few TC cells
contribute to the initial phase of the sequence, consistent with the
absence of rebound bursts during most early IPSPs; (3) the middle phase of a sequence results from synchronizing interactions in
the RE-TC-RE loop (Steriade et al., 1993; von Krosigk et al.,
1993); and (4) the termination of spindles is due to the depolarizing action of Ih (Bal and McCormick, 1996) in combination
with the depolarizing action of corticothalamic inputs, which is
caused by the lack of precise coordination of thalamic and cortical firing during the later phase of spindles. Thus, corticothalamic
activity is involved not only in the long-range synchronization of
spindles but also in the initiation and termination of individual
spindle sequences, thereby controlling spindle duration. The active involvement of the cortex in determining spindle duration
could influence cognitive processes during sleep, including memory consolidation as well as pathological states such as nocturnal
seizures.

References

Alzheimer C, Schwindt PC, Crill WE (1993) Modal gating of Na ϩ channels
as a mechanism of persistent Na ϩ current in pyramidal neurons from rat
and cat sensorimotor cortex. J Neurosci 13:660 – 673.
Andersen P, Andersson S, Lomo T (1968) Thalamo-cortical relations during spontaneous barbiturate spindles. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 24:90.
Bal T, McCormick DA (1993) Mechanisms of oscillatory activity in guineapig nucleus reticularis thalami in vitro: a mammalian pacemaker.
J Physiol 468:669 – 691.
Bal T, McCormick DA (1996) What stops synchronized thalamocortical oscillations? Neuron 17:297–308.
Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, Sejnowski TJ (1998) Computational
models of thalamocortical augmenting responses. J Neurosci 18:
6444 – 6465.

9134 • J. Neurosci., June 22, 2011 • 31(25):9124 –9134
Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, Sejnowski TJ (1999) Self-sustained
rhythmic activity in the thalamic reticular nucleus mediated by depolarizing GABAA receptor potentials. Nat Neurosci 2:168 –174.
Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, Sejnowski T (2000) Spiking-bursting
activity in the thalamic reticular nucleus initiates sequences of spindle
oscillations in thalamic networks. J Neurophysiol 84:1076 –1087.
Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Steriade M, Sejnowski TJ (2002) Model of
thalamocortical slow-wave sleep oscillations and transitions to activated
States. J Neurosci 22:8691– 8704.
Bo´dizs R, Kis T, La´za´r AS, Havra´n L, Rigo´ P, Clemens Z, Hala´sz P (2005)
Prediction of general mental ability based on neural oscillation measures
of sleep. J Sleep Res 14:285–292.
Born J, Fehm HL (1998) Hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal activity during
human sleep: a coordinating role for the limbic hippocampal system. Exp
Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 106:153–163.
Budde T, Biella G, Munsch T, Pape HC (1997) Lack of regulation by intracellular Ca 2ϩ of the hyperpolarization-activated cation current in rat
thalamic neurones. J Physiol 503:79 – 85.
Clemens Z, Fabo´ D, Hala´sz P (2005) Overnight verbal memory retention
correlates with the number of sleep spindles. Neuroscience 132:529 –535.
Contreras D, Steriade M (1995) Cellular basis of EEG slow rhythms: a study
of dynamic corticothalamic relationships. J Neurosci 15:604 – 622.
Contreras D, Steriade M (1996) Spindle oscillation in cats: the role of corticothalamic feedback in a thalamically generated rhythm. J Physiol
490:159 –179.
Contreras D, Destexhe A, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (1996) Control of spatiotemporal coherence of a thalamic oscillation by corticothalamic feedback. Science 274:771–774.
Contreras D, Destexhe A, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (1997) Spatiotemporal
patterns of spindle oscillations in cortex and thalamus. J Neurosci
17:1179 –1196.
Destexhe A, Babloyantz A (1993) A model of the inward current Ih and its
possible role in thalamocortical oscillations. Neuroreport 4:223–226.
Destexhe A, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ (1993) A model for 8 –10 Hz
spindling in interconnected thalamic relay and reticularis neurons. Biophys J 65:2473–2477.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (1994a) A model of
spindle rhythmicity in the isolated thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurophysiol 72:803– 818.
Destexhe A, Mainen ZF, Sejnowski TJ (1994b) Synthesis of models for excitable membranes, synaptic transmission and neuromodulation using a
common kinetic formalism. J Comput Neurosci 1:195–230.
Destexhe A, Bal T, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ (1996) Ionic mechanisms
underlying synchronized oscillations and propagating waves in a model of
ferret thalamic slices. J Neurophysiol 76:2049 –2070.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Steriade M (1998) Mechanisms underlying the
synchronizing action of corticothalamic feedback through inhibition of
thalamic relay cells. J Neurophysiol 79:999 –1016.
Eschenko O, Mo¨lle M, Born J, Sara SJ (2006) Elevated sleep spindle density
after learning or after retrieval in rats. J Neurosci 26:12914 –12920.
Fogel SM, Smith CT, Cote KA (2007) Dissociable learning-dependent
changes in REM and non-REM sleep in declarative and procedural memory systems. Behav Brain Res 180:48 – 61.
Fogel SM, Smith CT, Beninger RJ (2010) Too much of a good thing? Elevated baseline sleep spindles predict poor avoidance performance in rats.
Brain Res 1319:112–117.
Gais S, Mo¨lle M, Helms K, Born J (2002) Learning-dependent increases in
sleep spindle density. J Neurosci 22:6830 – 6834.
Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF (1952) A quantitative description of membrane
current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve.
J Physiol 117:500 –544.
Houweling AR, Bazhenov M, Timofeev I, Grenier F, Steriade M, Sejnowski TJ
(2002) Frequency-selective augmenting responses by short-term synaptic depression in cat neocortex. J Physiol 542:599 – 617.
Huguenard JR, Prince DA (1992) A novel T-type current underlies prolonged Ca 2ϩ-dependent burst firing in GABAergic neurons of rat thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurosci 12:3804 –3817.
Huguenard JR, McCormick DA (1992) Simulation of the currents involved
in rhythmic oscillations in thalamic relay neurons. J Neurophysiol
68:1373–1383.
Kay AR, Sugimori M, Llina´s R (1998) Kinetic and stochastic properties of a

Bonjean et al. • Control of Sleep Spindles Duration In Vivo
persistent sodium current in mature guinea pig cerebellar Purkinje cells.
J Neurophysiol 80:1167–1179.
Kim U, Bal T, McCormick DA (1995) Spindle waves are propagating synchronized oscillations in the ferret LGNd in vitro. J Neurophysiol
74:1301–1323.
Lu¨thi A, McCormick DA (1998a) Periodicity of thalamic synchronized oscillations: the role of Ca 2ϩ-mediated upregulation of Ih. Neuron
20:553–563.
Lu¨thi A, McCormick DA (1998b) H-current: properties of a neuronal and
network pacemaker. Neuron 21:9 –12.
Mainen ZF, Sejnowski TJ (1996) Influence of dendritic structure on firing
pattern in model neocortical neurons. Nature 382:363–366.
McCormick DA, Pape HC (1990) Properties of a hyperpolarizationactivated cation current and its role in rhythmic oscillation in thalamic
relay neurones. J Physiol 431:291–318.
Morison RS, Basset DL (1945) Electrical activity of the thalamus and basal
ganglia in decorticate cats. J Neurophysiol 8:309 –314.
Pinsky PF, Rinzel J (1994) Intrinsic and network rhythmogenesis in a reduced Traub model for CA3 neurons. J Comput Neurosci 1:39 – 60.
Rosanova M, Ulrich D (2005) Pattern-specific associative long-term potentiation induced by a sleep spindle-related spike train. J Neurosci 25:9398 –9405.
Schabus M, Ho¨dlmoser K, Gruber G, Sauter C, Anderer P, Klo¨sch G, Parapatics S, Saletu B, Klimesch W, Zeitlhofer J (2006) Sleep spindle-related
activity in the human EEG and its relation to general cognitive and learning abilities. Eur J Neurosci 23:1738 –1746.
Sejnowski TJ, Destexhe A (2000) Why do we sleep? Brain Res 886:208 –223.
Siapas AG, Wilson MA (1998) Coordinated interactions between hippocampal ripples and cortical spindles during slow-wave sleep. Neuron
21:1123–1128.
Soltesz I, Lightowler S, Leresche N, Jassik-Gerschenfeld D, Pollard CE,
Crunelli V (1991) Two inward currents and the transformation of lowfrequency oscillations of rat and cat thalamocortical cells. J Physiol
441:175–197.
Steriade M, Timofeev I (2003) Neuronal plasticity in thalamocortical networks during sleep and waking oscillations. Neuron 37:563–576.
Steriade M, Wyzinski P (1972) Cortically elicited activities in thalamic reticularis neurons. Brain Res 42:514 –520.
Steriade M, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ (1993) Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused brain. Science 262:679 – 685.
Steriade M, Timofeev I, Grenier F, Du¨rmu¨ller N (1998) Role of thalamic
and cortical neurons in augmenting responses and self-sustained activity:
dual intracellular recordings in vivo. J Neurosci 18:6425– 6443.
Stickgold R (2005) Sleep-dependent memory consolidation. Nature
437:1272–1278.
Timofeev I, Bazhenov M (2005) Mechanisms and biological role of
thalamocortical oscillations. In: Trends in chronobiology research
(Columbus F, ed), pp 1– 47. New York: Nova.
Timofeev I, Steriade M (1996) Low-frequency rhythms in the thalamus of intact-cortex and decorticated cats. J Neurophysiol
76:4152– 4168.
Timofeev I, Grenier F, Bazhenov M, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (2000) Origin
of slow cortical oscillations in deafferented cortical slabs. Cereb Cortex
10:1185–1199.
Timofeev I, Bazhenov M, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (2001) Contribution of
intrinsic and synaptic factors in the desynchronization of thalamic oscillatory activity. Thal Relat Syst 1:53– 69.
Timofeev I, Grenier F, Bazhenov M, Houweling AR, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M
(2002) Short- and medium-term plasticity associated with augmenting
responses in cortical slabs and spindles in intact cortex of cats in vivo.
J Physiol 542:583–598.
Tononi G, Cirelli C (2003) Sleep and synaptic homeostasis: a hypothesis.
Brain Res Bull 62:143–150.
Traub RD, Miles R (1991) Neuronal networks of the hippocampus. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge UP.
Tsodyks M, Markram H (1997) The neural code between neocortical pyramidal neurons depends on neurotransmitter release probability. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:719 –723.
von Krosigk M, Bal T, McCormick DA (1993) Cellular mechanisms of a
synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science 261:361–364.
Werk CM, Harbour VL, Chapman CA (2005) Induction of long-term potentiation leads to increased reliability of evoked neocortical spindles in
vivo. Neuroscience 131:793– 800.

