INSIGHTS | P E R S P E C T I V E S

NEUROSCIENCE

It takes the world to understand the brain
By Z. Josh Huang1 and Liqun Luo2

W

rating, and sharing enormous data sets. And
genome-wide mapping has identified genetic
variants that contribute to a wide spectrum
of human brain disorders.
To better appreciate the challenges of
understanding the brain, it is informative
to compare the brain projects with the first
large-scale international bioscience collaboration launched in late 1980s—the Human
Genome Project. The Human Genome Project
aimed to determine the complete sequence of

e are on the verge of a fundamental leap toward understanding the
human brain, and the implications
for health and society are profound. Large-scale brain projects
have been launched or are being
planned in multiple continents and countries (1–4). In June, about 50 leading scientists from the United States, Europe, Japan,
Korea, and China gathered in Suzhou, China (organized by Cold
Spring Harbor Asia) to discuss
Brain projects
the opportunities and challenges
BRAIN PROJECTS
in brain research (5). The benefits
of international coordination and
U.S. BRAIN Initiative
collaboration were recognized,
and the discussions laid a foundation for future meetings aimed at
fleshing out details related to speJapan Brain/MINDS
cific goals.

to, thousands of other neurons distributed
over local and distant brain space, delineating the wiring diagram of these neurons
(the connectome) alone is an immense challenge. Moreover, the connectome is not a
static network; both the connectivity pattern
and connection strengths change across life
stages and are modified by an individual’s
experience and learning. Furthermore, mapping the connectome is only one step toward
understanding the brain—it is the dynamic
firing of neuronal ensembles and
their communication across local
and global networks, which are laysummary
ered onto the structural framework
MAJOR GOALS AND FOCUS
of the connectome, that generate
perception, cognition, and action.
•Tools to enable a brain cell census and for
recording/modulating brain circuit
activity linked to behavior
•Multilevel brain data
•New computational models and theory

FRONTS.
Neuroscientists
largely agree that to achieve a deep
understanding of how the brain
•Nonhuman primate brain
processes information and orches•Collaboration between clinicians and
trates mental functions, substanresearchers toward knowledge-based
diagnosis and treatment of brain disorders
COMPLEXITY. The human brain
tial progress is needed on at least
is arguably the most complex ensix fronts: (i) identifying the basic
Europe HBP
•Big data integration and analysis
tity in the known universe, and
components of brain circuits—
(Human Brain Project)
•Computational modeling
this complexity is best reflected
classes of neurons that share simi•Mouse visual system
Allen Institute for Brain
by the fact that the brain strives
lar properties and perform similar
•Human cortex
Science
•Open, public, shared database and tools
to understand itself—how its molfunctions (belong to the same cell
ecules, cells, circuits, and systems
types); (ii) deciphering the neuKorea Brain Project
•Systems neuroscience of cognition and
enable perception, cognition,
ronal wiring diagrams integrated
brain disorders
•Neural circuits and brain imaging
memory, emotion, thought, lanacross multiple scales, from indiguage, art, and contemplation of
vidual synapses (microscopic) to
China Brain
•Neural circuitry of cognition
Science Project
•Brain disorders
humanity’s place in the natural
the entire brain (macroscopic); (iii)
(in planning)
•Brain-inspired intelligence technologies
world. Inquiry into the origins
recording the firing patterns—the
of mental faculties and disorders
common vocabulary of neuronal
Brain Canada
•Increased brain research funding
•Collaboration related to brain disorders
in the brain dates back to antiqcommunication—of large numuity (6). Since the formulation of
bers of neurons across different
Taiwan
•Neurodegeneration
the neuron doctrine and detailed
brain regions while an animal or
•Chronic pain
structural studies by Ramón y
human subject performs well-charAustralia
•Collaboration with U.S. BRAIN
Cajal more than a century ago (7),
acterized behavioral or cognitive
there has been great progress in
tasks; (iv) manipulating neuronal
understanding the cellular basis of
firing patterns with spatiotempobrain organization and function. In the past
the human genetic blueprint encrypted in ~3
ral precision so as to establish the causality
decade, technological advances in multiple
billion nucleotides organized along 23 chrobetween neuronal activity and circuit funcdisciplines have accelerated that progress.
mosomes. The genome is a largely static lintion that contributes to behavior; (v) inventNew tools for visualizing, recording, and maear sequence composed of just four discrete
ing computational tools for integrating and
nipulating neurons and neural circuits are
nucleotides; the ~20,500 protein-encoding
analyzing large and complex data sets; and
enabling deeper insight into how the brain
genes constitute 1 to 2% of this sequence. The
(vi) formulating overarching brain theories
processes information and guides behavior.
project provided the foundation for an explothat transcend levels and scales, conceptualAdvances in computer science have exponension of biomedical research.
ize experimental findings, and predict novel
tially boosted the capacity for analyzing, cuThe human brain can be considered vastly
circuit properties that underlie brain funcmore complex in multiple aspects. It contion. In addition, because most experiments
11
14
tains
~10
neurons,
linked
by
~10
synaptic
are performed in animal models, knowledge
1
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724,
connections. As any one neuron on average
gleaned from animal experiments must be inUSA. 2HHMI/Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA 94305, USA. E-mail: huangj@cshl.edu; lluo@stanford.edu
receives inputs from, and delivers outputs
tegrated with insights gained from recording,

42

SIX

sciencemag.org SCIENCE

2 OCTOBER 2015 • VOL 350 ISSUE 6256

Published by AAAS

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on October 14, 2015

International brain projects discuss how to coordinate efforts

stimulating, and imaging the human brain to
understand human mental functions and to
treat brain disorders.

GRAPHIC: C. SMITH/SCIENCE

OVERVIEW OF PROJECTS. The current

brain projects launched or planned in different countries have different emphases
(see the table and figure). The U.S. BRAIN
(Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies) Initiative is now
in the second year of a 12-year plan. Its initial phase emphasizes developing new tools
that are expected to catalyze discoveries in
later phases about neural circuit function
in health and disease (1, 2). The European
Union’s Human Brain Project (3), started
in 2013 and financed by the Future Emerging Technologies Program of the European
Community, focuses on large-scale computational modeling and building neuroinformatics standards for brain databases,
and could benefit from data acquired
from brain projects around the globe. Japan’s Brain/MINDS (Brain Mapping by
Integrated Neurotechnologies for Disease
Studies) project (4), launched at the end
of 2014, features primates—in particular,
the marmoset, a relatively new genetic
primate model—for basic research and
for modeling human brain disorders.
Brain Canada was announced this year,
supporting collaborative, multidisciplinary, multi-institutional neuroscience research. Korea also just started its
brain project on the systems neuroscience
of cognition and brain disorders, with emphasis on neural circuits and brain imaging. China has yet to officially announce
its brain project, but discussions are well
under way, and its scope will likely include neural circuits of cognition, brain
disorders, and brain-inspired intelligence
technologies. Nonhuman primate studies
including the macaque monkey, a longstanding model for neuroscience research,
are likely to be part of China’s brain project.
Taiwan is planning a modest-scale brain
project on neurodegeneration and chronic
pain, with emphasis on interdisciplinary
studies and development of novel neurotechnologies. This year, Australia established a collaborative effort with the U.S.
BRAIN Initiative. In addition to these government-funded brain projects, the Seattlebased, privately funded Allen Institute for
Brain Science launched a 10-year brain circuit project that intends to create a system
of publicly shared data and tools to study
mouse and human visual systems.
STANDARDIZATION. No single country or

brain project alone is equipped with the
collective intellectual, technological, financial, and human power needed to achieve

the task of understanding the brain. The
Suzhou discussions identified several areas
where the needs for international coordination are particularly acute but likely to be
high-yielding if particular strengths of the
different brain projects are leveraged and
standardization is implemented.
Take the problem of cell type as an example. The brain consists of a large diversity of
nerve cell types that serve as working units of
widely distributed neural networks. Systematic identification and classification of this
parts list is a prerequisite to mapping the
wiring diagram, recording and manipulating
cell type–specific activity, and deciphering
circuit operations that underlie information
processing and behavior. The recent convergence of neural developmental studies from
invertebrates to mammals, as well as genetic

cell types across multiple model organisms,
including humans, should reveal common
principles as well as key differences concerning the organization of the brain’s working
units. With this parts list in hand, scientists
can systematically establish experimental access to specific cell types, which will greatly
facilitate and integrate multiple levels of neural circuit studies.
Coordination and standardization of data
(not to mention metadata acquisition, curation, and analysis) are more challenging in
certain domains of neuroscience research
such as neurophysiology and brain imaging.
An extreme example is behavior, the final
output of neural circuit operation and ultimate manifestation of brain function. Because behavior results from the integration
of sensory inputs, brain states, and cogni-

Funding characteristics
U.S. BRAIN

Japan Brain/MINDS

Europe HBP

Allen Institute for
Brain Science

Korea Brain Project

12 years

10 years

10 years

10 years

10 years

$100 million
per year

$30 million
per year

€ 1 billion total
(~$1.1 billion)

$50 to $80 million
per year

$50 million
per year

•Centralized at
Riken Brain
Science Institute
•Decentralized
participation by
other universities
and institutes

•Centralized
•Participating
groups throughout
Europe

To ramp up to a
total of ~$5 billion
by 2025
•Set strategic priorities
•Initially decentralized
funding of small
groups of investigators
•May include larger
projects at a later phase

and genomic technologies, has made it possible to systematically identify distinct cell
types. Single-cell transcriptome profiling
(quantitative determination of the expression levels of all genes) promises to refine
cell type definition and enhance precision of
genetic access to individual cell types (using
genetic tools to label, record, and manipulate
activity in a cell type–specific manner). Thus,
the cell type problem is fundamental and
challenging, yet well-defined and solvable by
leveraging the collective power of individual
brain projects.
What should be standardized in this context? Cell transcriptomes can be acquired
with a defined format, deposited into a common database, and analyzed similarly to the
genome data. Data sets on cell location, morphology, and projection patterns (locations
in the brain where cells send information)
can also be standardized. Comparisons of

SCIENCE sciencemag.org

•Funded by
philanthropist
Paul Allen
•Recruits funding
from the U.S.
National Institutes
of Health

•Centralized at
Korean Brain
Research Institute,
Institute of
Brain Science, and
Korean Institute
of Science and
Technology

tive decision-making, and because it manifests as high-dimensional motor output, it
is inherently complex and variable even in
highly constrained experimental conditions,
let alone more naturalistic paradigms. To
understand the neural basis of behavior, scientists use many different and often highly
specialized experimental designs to record
and manipulate neuronal activities in different brain regions while animals or human
subjects perform tasks of varying sophistication. Thus, not only the behavioral data
themselves but also simultaneous recording
and manipulation of neural activity can be
difficult to standardize. Indeed, the Suzhou
discussions included vigorous debate as to
whether it is possible, or even beneficial, to
standardize a few sets of agreed-upon behavioral paradigms for data acquisition and
comparison across different labs, and for
comparison across species.
2 OCTOBER 2015 • VOL 350 ISSUE 6256

Published by AAAS

43

INSIGHTS | P E R S P E C T I V E S

different nations are needed that offer theofrastructure that makes sharing data among
retical, computational, and experimental
the brain projects feasible. But creating such
courses. Another useful mechanism is to
a system is a formidable task, and funding
support sustained programs of exchange stuand personnel requirements are often undents among collaborating research groups
derestimated. However, the benefits of data
to learn specific experimental techniques or
sharing make this an important issue. For
data analysis tools.
example, genetic data from human patients
suffering from brain disorders can be shared
FUNDING. Even in nations where brain projaround the globe; such data sharing thus
ects are already ongoing, steady support is
far has spurred the identification of genetic
not guaranteed. For example, although the
variants contributing to disorders such as
working group of the U.S. BRAIN Initiative
schizophrenia and autism (8–10). In 2005,
has made specific, conservative budget recthe International Neuroinformatics Coordiommendations for 12 years, the actual fundnating Facility (INCF) was initiated by the
ing requires congressional approval each
Global Science Forum of the Organization
year and is subject to short-term fluctuations
for Economic Cooperation and Developof the political process. All brain projects at
ment to help advance data reuse and represent are organized to primarily fund reproducibility in brain research through the
search groups within individual countries or
development of global
a continent. Thus, innovastandards, best practices,
tive funding strategies and
tools, and infrastructure
mechanisms are needed to
(11). INCF and other simisupport international collar organizations may be
laboration. Here, support
best positioned to support
from private organizations
data sharing (as well as
and philanthropists can
draw partnerships among
boost the brain projects.
scientific, clinical, techniFor example, the Allen Incal, industrial, and fundstitute for Brain Science,
ing arms).
launched ~10 years ago,
Human Connectome Project
Another need is for
has generated large data
resource sharing. For exsets (such as murine gene
ample, nonhuman primate research is highly
expression and neuronal projection maps)
valuable for disease biology but is expensive
that have benefited the neuroscience commuand time-consuming, with associated ethical
nity worldwide. Likewise, the Janelia Farm
issues. Genetic engineering and genetic modResearch Campus of the Howard Hughes
eling of human brain disorders in nonhuman
Medical Institute, also established ~10 years
primate models could greatly benefit from
ago (focused on information-processing
coordinating research on shared experimenprinciples in neural circuits and developing
tal animals. Establishing international prinew tools), has made key contributions to
mate centers as hubs for such collaborations
the foundation of brain projects. The Simons
could move this forward.
Foundation launched a “Global Brain” collaboration for studies of population neural
TRAINING. In response to the avalanche of
data at cellular resolution and advanced stabig data on multiple scales, and in recognitistical modeling, and the Kavli Foundation
tion of the extraordinary complexity of neuhas supported neuroscience centers and the
ral circuits endowed with an abundance of
initial discussion of the U.S. BRAIN project.
feedback loops, there is a need to expand the
Strategic collaborations that capitalize on the
field of theory and computational modelunique expertise of small research groups on
ing. Computational neuroscience provides a
the one hand, and the high-throughput, large
necessary bridge between neurobiology and
data capacity of private research institutes on
brain-inspired intelligence. In particular, the
the other, may achieve milestone advances
Suzhou discussions noted the importance
that are not possible by working separately.
of equipping a new generation of scientists
Of course, continued and effective engagewith the knowledge and tools of multiple
ment with the public is critical to gathering
disciplines for exploring the brain. In parand maintaining support for brain projects.
ticular, a consensus emerged that analyzing
and conceptualizing large data sets from
NEXT STEPS. The most important outcome
brain projects will require talents that can
of the Suzhou discussions is the unanimous
better integrate experimental neuroscience
agreement and enthusiasm that coordination
with computational analyses, modeling, and
of the world’s multiple brain projects is necestheory. To leverage brain projects at the insary and feasible, even though specific impleternational scale, “hybrid” interdisciplinary
mentation mechanisms remain to be worked
degree programs and training centers across
out. In the formative period of genome se44

quencing, a series of meetings including
those organized by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory profoundly shaped the foundation and
international collaboration of the Human
Genome Project. The success of this project
has revolutionized biology and medicine and
has produced exceptionally high returns on
the investment (12). Unlike this and other
large-scale national or international physics (e.g., CERN) and engineering programs
(e.g., space programs), all characterized by
well-defined goals and more definable strategies, a unique challenge for the brain projects is that the overarching goal may only be
achieved by solving a large set of multifaceted and interrelated problems in multiple
organisms (including humans), with highly
interdisciplinary approaches carried out in
many laboratories across the globe. There
are few precedents for such a large-scale and
highly sophisticated scientific endeavor. We
envision that the discussions initiated in Suzhou will continue in future meetings as the
national brain projects evolve. The collective
success of these projects will be enormous: It
will yield greater insight into the inner working of the human brain, often considered
the last frontier of scientific inquiry; help
to treat devastating brain disorders that are
major burdens on current and future society;
inspire brain-like computer design and intelligence technologies; spawn new industries
and stimulate new economies; build foundational links from science to the humanities;
and ultimately achieve a deeper understanding of what makes us human. ■
REF ERENCES AND NOTES

1. L. A. Jorgenson et al., Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London Ser. B
370, 20140164 (2015).
2. www.braininitiative.nih.gov/2025/BRAIN2025.pdf
3. www.humanbrainproject.eu/
4. http://brainminds.jp/en/overview/organization
5. Cold Spring Harbor Asia Conference on International
Brain Projects, 19 to 22 June 2015, Suzhou, China (see the
supplement).
6. Hippocrates, On the Sacred Disease (~400 C.E.); http://
classics.mit.edu/Hippocrates/sacred.html.
7. S. Ramón y Cajal, Histology of the Nervous System of Man
and Vertebrates (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1995; translation of 1911 French version).
8. Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics
Consortium, Nature 511, 421 (2014).
9. S. De Rubeis et al., Nature 515, 209 (2014).
10. I. Iossifov et al., Nature 515, 216 (2014).
11. www.incf.org
12. http://battelle.org/docs/default-document-library/economic_impact_of_the_human_genome_project.pdf
ACKNOWL EDGMENTS

We thank all meeting participants (see the supplement) for
their contributions to the discussion, and W. Newsome, T.
Bonhoeffer, W. Koroshetz, S. Hyman, G. Buzsaki, and Y. Fregnac
for comments. We acknowledge Suzhou Industrial Park for
generously supporting the meeting.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS

www.sciencemag.org/content/350/6256/42/suppl/DC1
Supplementary Text

10.1126/science.aad4120

sciencemag.org SCIENCE

2 OCTOBER 2015 • VOL 350 ISSUE 6256

Published by AAAS

CREDIT: HUMAN CONNECTOME PROJECT/NIH

SHARING. There is pressing need for an in-

It takes the world to understand the brain
Z. Josh Huang and Liqun Luo
Science 350, 42 (2015);
DOI: 10.1126/science.aad4120

This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only.

If you wish to distribute this article to others, you can order high-quality copies for your
colleagues, clients, or customers by clicking here.

The following resources related to this article are available online at
www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of October 14, 2015 ):
Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online
version of this article at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/350/6256/42.full.html
Supporting Online Material can be found at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2015/09/30/350.6256.42.DC1.html
A list of selected additional articles on the Science Web sites related to this article can be
found at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/350/6256/42.full.html#related
This article cites 4 articles, 1 of which can be accessed free:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/350/6256/42.full.html#ref-list-1
This article appears in the following subject collections:
Neuroscience
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/neuroscience

Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright
2015 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title Science is a
registered trademark of AAAS.

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on October 14, 2015

Permission to republish or repurpose articles or portions of articles can be obtained by
following the guidelines here.

