PHYSICAL REVIEW E, VOLUME 63, 021903

Prediction of electroencephalographic spectra from neurophysiology
P. A. Robinson,1,* C. J. Rennie,

1,2,3

J. J. Wright,4 H. Bahramali,3 E. Gordon,3 and D. L. Rowe1,3

1

School of Physics, University of Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia
Department of Medical Physics, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, New South Wales 2145, Australia
3
Brain Dynamics Center, Department of Psychological Medicine, Westmead Hospital and University of Sydney,
Westmead, New South Wales 2145, Australia
4
Mental Health Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia
͑Received 22 May 2000; revised manuscript received 19 October 2000; published 18 January 2001͒
2

A recent neurophysical model of propagation of electrical waves in the cortex is extended to include a
physiologically motivated subcortical feedback loop via the thalamus. The electroencephalographic spectrum
when the system is driven by white noise is then calculated analytically in terms of physiological parameters,
including the effects of filtering of signals by the cerebrospinal fluid, skull, and scalp. The spectral power at
low frequencies is found to vary as f Ϫ1 when awake and f Ϫ3 when asleep, with a breakpoint to a steeper
power-law tail at frequencies above about 20 Hz in both cases; the f Ϫ1 range concurs with recent magnetoencephalographic observations of such a regime. Parameter sensitivities are explored, enabling a model with
fewer free parameters to be proposed, and showing that spectra predicted for physiologically reasonable
parameter values strongly resemble those observed in the laboratory. Alpha and beta peaks seen near 10 Hz
and twice that frequency, respectively, in the relaxed wakeful state are generated via subcortical feedback in
this model, thereby leading to predictions of their frequencies in terms of physiological parameters, and of
correlations in their occurrence. Subcortical feedback is also predicted to be responsible for production of
anticorrelated peaks in deep sleep states that correspond to the occurrence of theta rhythm at around half the
alpha frequency and sleep spindles at 3/2 times the alpha frequency. An additional positively correlated waking
peak near three times the alpha frequency is also predicted and tentatively observed, as are two new types of
sleep spindle near 5/2 and 7/2 times the alpha frequency, and anticorrelated with alpha. These results provide
a theoretical basis for the conventional division of EEG spectra into frequency bands, but imply that the exact
bounds of these bands depend on the individual. Three types of potential instability are found: one at zero
frequency, another in the theta band at around half the alpha frequency, and a third at the alpha frequency
itself.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevE.63.021903

PACS number͑s͒: 87.10.ϩe, 87.19.La, 87.18.Ϫh

I. INTRODUCTION

Electroencephalograms ͑EEGs͒ have diverse forms that
are correlated with differing pathologies and states of
arousal, as determined independently by behavioral and
clinical measures ͓1͔, and are inferred to be closely connected to brain dynamics, information processing, and cognition ͓2,3͔. These correlations are widely used diagnostically, where they have been employed to elucidate
fundamental mechanisms of overall brain function and dysfunction. Even so, they are not well understood in terms of
the underlying physiology, despite 125 years’ work ͓1,4,5͔.
Prominent in EEGs are the alpha rhythm ͑narrowband at
7–11 Hz in the relaxed waking state, weakening rapidly with
increased attention, or with sleep͒, and beta rhythm ͑broader
band at 15–25 Hz͒, and sleep spindles ͑12–14 Hz, occurring
in deeper sleep and sometimes termed sigma activity͒, as
shown in Fig. 1. The experimental setup and procedures for
acquisition of these spectra have been described in detail
elsewhere, along with the methods used to ensure that artifacts do not significantly contaminate the data ͓6͔; a brief
summary is given in Appendix A. The origins of these
rhythms are also obscure and have not been quantified in
terms of physiology, although the thalamus is widely thought

*Electronic address: robinson@physics.usyd.edu.au
1063-651X/2001/63͑2͒/021903͑18͒/$15.00

to be involved in alpha, beta, and sleep spindles ͓7–12͔,
since experiments show high coherence between EEGs in the
two structures ͓10,13–15͔. Underlying the specific rhythms
is a smoother background EEG spectrum whose origin and
structure are even more cryptic. Recently, analogous magnetoencephalographic ͑MEG͒ measurements revealed that the
low frequency component of this background was 1/f noise,
whose power spectrum P( f ) decreased as P( f )ϳ f Ϫa , with
aϷ1 ͓16͔; at high frequencies the decrease was much
steeper. In deep sleep there is a strong enhancement of
the spectrum at low frequencies, in the so-called delta
( f Ͻ3.5 Hz) and theta ͑4 Hz Ͻ f Ͻ7.5 Hz) ranges
͓1,10,17,18͔.
Scientific and clinical understanding of EEGs would be
greatly facilitated by a theory, based on physiology, that
could predict features of EEG spectra such as those mentioned above. Consequently, many attempts to model largescale cortical electrical activity have been made, with varying degrees of physiological realism and incorporating
differing aspects of the cortex. One avenue has been to average over microscopic neural structure to develop continuum cortical models on scales from millimeters up to the
whole cortex ͓7,10,15,19–33͔. Some continuum models
yield wave equations for the propagation of cortical activity
͓10,21–24,27,31–33͔, which are particularly convenient for
analysis and which incorporate realistic anatomical features
such as separate excitatory and inhibitory neural populations

63 021903-1

©2001 The American Physical Society

P. A. ROBINSON et al.

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

back and filtering by overlying tissues. Analytic predictions
for EEG spectra in terms of physiological parameters are
then made in Sec. III, and the structure of the underlying
spectrum is estimated. Parameter sensitivities are explored in
Sec. IV, leading to elimination of several parameters to yield
a simplified model that is well suited for comparison with
data. This simplified model is used to estimate the locations,
sizes, and possible instabilities of spectral peaks in Sec. V,
and thereby formulate constraints on the underlying feedback
physiology. These results justify the customary division of
EEG spectra into distinct bands, but highlight the significance of individual variability in this subdivision. In the case
of spectra predicted when the cortex is near marginal stability, a state that has been inferred from MEG observations
͓16͔, further simplifications can be obtained; these are discussed in Sec. VI.
II. THEORY

In this section we outline the main relevant results of our
recent wave-equation formulation of continuum cortical dynamics ͓21–23͔, which incorporates the physiological effects
discussed in Sec. I. We then generalize this model in Sec.
II B to incorporate a corticothalamic feedback loop, motivated by a range of physiological considerations.
A. Basic model

FIG. 1. Illustrative examples of EEG spectra from a normal
subject, with waking spectra ͑eyes closed, solid curves͒ showing
alpha and beta peaks near 9.5 Hz and 19 Hz, while sleep spectra
͑sleep stage 2, dashed curves͒ show spindle peaks near 14 Hz. All
these spectra have been smoothed for clearer display using a 1 Hz
wide window function. ͑a͒ Cz electrode. ͑b͒ Fz electrode. ͑c͒ Pz
electrode. ͑d͒ C3 electrode. ͑e͒ C4 electrode. ͑f͒ All spectra superposed to show interelectrode variability.

͑e.g., pyramidal cells and interneurons, respectively͒, nonlinearities, long-range excitatory connections, dendritic signalintegration effects, axonal time delays, and intracortical feedback.
In this paper we study the spectral properties and parameter dependences of our recent physiology-based waveequation theory of the cortex ͓21–23,33͔, concentrating in
particular on the consequences of adding a subcortical feedback loop, probably involving the thalamus, with plausible
physiological characteristics, and the filtering that occurs between cortex and scalp. Our aims are to formulate a relatively simple, physiologically based model that can reproduce the main features of EEGs such as those in Fig. 1, and
to explore its qualitative properties and parameter sensitivities. In future work, we will test the predictions of this model
via quantitative comparisons with data. It is also anticipated
that the usefulness of our results will be further enhanced by
comparison with simultaneous measurements of brain function via positron emission tomography or functional magnetic resonance imaging.
In Sec. II we briefly review the model developed in our
previous work and extend it to include corticothalamic feed-

The mean firing rates ͑or pulse densities͒ Q a of excitatory
(aϭe) and inhibitory (aϭi) neurons are approximately related to the cell-body potentials V a by
Q a ͑ r,t ͒ ϭ

Q max
a
1ϩexp͓ Ϫ ͑ ␲ / ␴ a ͱ3 ͒ ͕ V a ͑ r,t ͒ Ϫ ␪ a ͖ ͔

,

͑1͒

where ␪ a is the mean firing threshold of neurons of type a,
␴ a is the standard deviation in this threshold in the neural
Ϫ1
is the maximum attainable
population, and Q max
a տ100 s
firing rate. The coordinate r refers to position on the cortex,
modeled as a two-dimensional sheet, which is justified by its
relative thinness.
The quantity V a is the potential at the cell body after
inputs have been summed and filtered through the dendrites.
A good approximation to V a is ͓21–23͔

͵

ϱ

L ͑ tϪt Ј ͒ P a ͑ r,t Ј ͒ dt Ј ,

͑2͒

␣␤
͑ e Ϫ ␣ u Ϫe Ϫ ␤ u ͒ ⌰ ͑ u ͒ ,
␤Ϫ␣

͑3͒

V a ͑ r,t ͒ ϭ

Ϫϱ

with
L͑ u ͒ϭ

where P a is the mean potential generated by action potentials
arriving from other neurons at the dendrites of neurons of
type a, ⌰ is the unit step function, and ␣ and ␤ are dendritic
rate constants, with ␤ у ␣ assumed without loss of generality. The Fourier transform of L(u), used below, is

021903-2

L ͑ ␻ ͒ ϭ ͑ 1Ϫi ␻ / ␣ ͒ Ϫ1 ͑ 1Ϫi ␻ / ␤ ͒ Ϫ1 ,

͑4͒

PREDICTION OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC . . .

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

which implies that the dendrites act as a low-pass filter with
cutoff frequency ␣ and a steeper fall-off for ␻ Ͼ ␤ .
The potential P a at a particular location comprises contributions from fields ␾ e,i that represent signals propagating
from other cortical neurons, and subcortical inputs ␾ s
͓21,23͔:
P a ϭN ae s e ␾ e ϩN ai s i ␾ i ϩN as s s ␾ s .

TABLE I. Physiological estimates of parameters of the model,
as discussed in Refs. ͓23͔ and ͓24͔. The limits given are only approximate.

͑5͒

Here, N ab is the mean number of couplings from neurons of
type bϭe,i,s to those of type a, and s b is the size of the
response to a unit signal from neurons of type b.
Outgoing pulses from each neuron propagate along its
axon and axonal tree at a velocity v Ϸ10 m sϪ1 . Assuming
an isotropic distribution of axons with a distribution of
ranges in accord with experiment ͑see Ref. ͓21͔ for the exact
distribution͒, this propagation can be described by damped
wave equations for the fields ␾ a , which represent axonal
signals:
D a ␾ a ͑ r,t ͒ ϭQ a ͑ r,t ͒ ,
D aϭ

1

␥ 2a

ͫ

‫ץ‬2
‫ץ‬t

2

ϩ2 ␥ a

‫ץ‬
‫ץ‬t

͑6͒

ͬ

ϩ ␥ 2a Ϫ v 2 ٌ 2 ,

͑7͒

where ␥ a ϭ v /r a and r a is the characteristic range of axons of
type a ͓21͔. Strictly speaking, very short-range excitatory
axons have lower v than the longer range corticocortical
ones, because they are not myelinated. This effect is omitted
here on the grounds that the difference will not have strong
effects on long-range wave propagation, but could be incorporated by splitting excitatory neurons into two populations
with a corresponding division of the field ␾ e into two parts.
Equations ͑1͒–͑7͒ determine the steady states of cortical
activation, when the cortex is driven by a constant, spatially
uniform stimulus ␾ s(0) . Small perturbations relative to these
steady states obey a linear wave equation which yields the
transfer functions ͓23͔

␾ e ͑ k, ␻ ͒
G es L ͑ ␻ ͒
ϭ
,
␾ s ͑ k, ␻ ͒ D e ͓ 1ϪG ii L ͑ ␻ ͔͒ ϪG ee L ͑ ␻ ͒

͑8͒

␾ i ͑ k, ␻ ͒ D e G is ␾ e ͑ k, ␻ ͒
ϭ
,
␾ s ͑ k, ␻ ͒
G es ␾ s ͑ k, ␻ ͒

͑9͒

D e ͑ k, ␻ ͒ ϭk 2 r 2e ϩ ͑ 1Ϫi ␻ / ␥ e ͒ 2 ,

͑10͒

in Fourier space. Here, the gain parameters G ab ϭ ␳ a N ab s b
express the response strength in neurons a due to a unit signal incident from neurons of type b. The parameter ␳ a
(0)
ϭdQ (0)
a /dV a Ϸ ␲ Q a / ␴ a ͱ3 is evaluated in the steady state
(0)
is the steady-state firing rate.
where Q a ϭ5 – 10 sϪ1 ӶQ max
a
In writing ͑8͒ and ͑9͒ we used the short range of inhibitory
axons to set D i ϭ1, the local inhibition approximation ͓21͔,
and assumed that the numbers of interconnections between
neural types are proportional to the number of available synapses, the random connectivity approximation ͓21–
23,28,34͔.

Quantity

Value

Unit

␴ e,i
␪ e,i
␣
␤/␣
re
ri
v
t0
N ee ,N ie ,N se
N ei ,N ii ,N si
N es ,N is
s e,s
Ϫs i
␥e
␥i
max
Q e,i
Q e,i
␳ e,i,s
G ee
ϪG ii
ϪG es

3–8
10–25
50–200
1–5
70–100
ϳ0.1
7–10
25–100
2000–6000
300–1000
30–100
1–3
5–8
70–150
ϳ105
100–300
5–10
1000–6000
2–90
1.3–60
0.03–2

mV
mV
sϪ1
mm
mm
m sϪ1
ms

␮V s
␮V s
sϪ1
sϪ1
sϪ1
sϪ1
Ϫ1 Ϫ1
V s

The parameters of the above model are physiologically
measurable, although not all have yet been measured precisely. Table I lists typical values inferred from physiology
͓23,24͔, plus values of several other quantities that are discussed below.
B. Subcortical feedback

Several suggestions for the production of the resonances
that correspond to observed cortical rhythms have been
made. These include the possible occurrence of standing
waves in the cortex, a potential scenario that is incorporated
in the model outlined in Sec. II A, but which does not appear
to yield sufficiently sharp resonances to account for observations ͓21–23͔ if physiologically realistic input parameters are
used in our model. A second possibility is the presence of a
thalamic ‘‘pacemaker’’ or ‘‘clock’’ ͓9,10͔, which we do not
consider here, although it can be incorporated into our
model. Third, it has been widely noted that the thalamus also
displays alpha rhythm ͑and possibly beta and sleep-spindle
peaks͒, with a high degree of correlation with the cortical
one ͓7–10,13,14,18͔, which may result either from pacemaker activity or from some form of corticothalamic feedback. Hence, we are particularly motivated to include corticothalamic feedback in our model.
A key subcortical feedback loop that may underlie production of the alpha rhythm involves feedback via the diffuse
thalamocortical projection system ͓8,9,13,14,35͔. This system projects both to other thalamic nuclei and from the thalamus to the whole cortex and thus has the potential to be

021903-3

P. A. ROBINSON et al.

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

signals by differentiating them in the loop. Differentiation
circuits are commonplace in the brain ͑e.g., for edge detection in the visual field͒, so the latter type of feedback certainly cannot be ruled out, and has been discussed previously
in the context of CT feedback ͓8͔. Limiting cases of truly
specific feedback ͑each point in the cortex feeds back to
itself͒ and totally diffuse feedback with uniform driving ͑every point feeds back to the whole cortex, making every point
equivalent to every other one if the driving is at least statistically uniform, thereby reducing the system to a zerodimensional one͒ are included in the form ͑11͒, but intermediate types of spatial variation would require a k-dependent
transfer function and are not considered here.
The frequency-domain transfer function that corresponds
to the above physiology can be written as
FIG. 2. Schematic block diagram of the corticothalamic feedback loop, showing inputs from excitatory ͑e͒ and inhibitory ͑i͒
neurons in the cortex, transmission through both thalamic populations, and feedback to both cortical populations. The gain parameters G ab are defined after ͓10͔ in the text.

involved in modulating large-scale EEG activity
͓8,14,18,36͔; it also has the correct latency of tens of ms ͓8͔.
Other corticothalamic loops pass through the so-called specific nuclei of the thalamus ͑e.g., the pulvinar, lateral posterior, and ventral anterior nuclei͒, which themselves project
preferentially back to the same cortical areas that stimulate
them ͓1,36͔. We stress that, although we assume corticothalamic feedback in the remainder of this paper, for definiteness and simplicity, the results obtained are applicable to
other potential feedback loops with like characteristics. Corticothalamic feedback should be significant because the
thalamus is known to strongly affect the state of attention of
the cortex, implying the existence of influential projections
from thalamus to cortex. Strong projections in the reverse
direction also exist to complete the loop, involving an even
greater number of axons ͓37–39͔.
Corticothalamic ͑CT͒ feedback is modeled approximately
here by assuming that ␾ s is the sum of a non-CT part ␾ N and
a feedback ␾ T , which travels along excitatory neurons that
project to excitatory and inhibitory neurons in the thalamus
before returning to the cortex via other excitatory neurons.
This situation is illustrated in Fig. 2. The feedback signal
thus passes through nϳ1 additional neurons compared to
direct corticocortical connections ͑which involve more than
one neuron on average͒. This adds a propagation time delay
t 0 and nϳ1 extra stages of dendritic filtering with rate constants ␩ 1 and ␩ 2 of the same order as ␣ and ␤ . We thus
approximate ␾ T by

␾ T ϭT e ͑ ␻ ͒ ␾ e .

͑12͒

⌿ ͑ ␻ ͒ ϭ ␺ Ϫi ␻ t 0 ␺ Ј ,

͑13͒

␶͑ ␻ ͒ϭ

e i␻t0
͑ 1Ϫi ␻ / ␩ 1 ͒ n ͑ 1Ϫi ␻ / ␩ 2 ͒ n

,

͑14͒

where ␶ (0)ϭ1, and ␺ and ␺ Ј measure the strengths of direct
and differential feedbacks. The factor t 0 in ͑13͒ is included
to make ␺ Ј dimensionless.
The magnitudes and signs of ␺ and ␺ Ј in ͑13͒ are expected to vary with state of arousal as the relative responses
of the excitatory and inhibitory neurons in the thalamus
change. Such changes may result from the action of neurotransmitters or neuromodulators that preferentially affect
one population or the other, for example. Hence, if the coupling of thalamic inhibitory neurons to thalamocortical excitatory fibers exceeds that of excitatory ones in some states,
the thalamus will invert incoming signals as well as filtering,
delaying, and ͑in part͒ differentiating them. In Sec. IV we
will see that, for many purposes, one may approximate ͑14͒
by setting nϭ1 and ␩ 1 ϭ ␩ 2 ϭ ␣ .
Combining ͑8͒–͑14͒, we find the transfer functions for
non-CT stimuli to be given by

␾ e ͑ k, ␻ ͒
ϭG es L ͑ ␻ ͒͑ D e ͓ 1ϪG ii L ͑ ␻ ͔͒
␾ N ͑ k, ␻ ͒
ϪG ee ͓ 1ϩ⌿ ͑ ␻ ͒ ␶ ͑ ␻ ͔͒ L ͑ ␻ ͒͒ Ϫ1 ,

͑15͒

and the analog of ͑9͒.
The dispersion relation of waves in our model system is
given by setting the denominator of ͑15͒ to zero, giving
k 2 ϩq 2 ͑ ␻ ͒ ϭ0,

͑11͒

This incorporates feedback of both excitatory and inhibitory
input signals to excitatory neurons ͑thereby generating the
field ␾ e ) that project to the thalamus. After time delays and
thalamic low-pass filtering, encapsulated in the transfer function T e ( ␻ ), this signal returns to the cortex via other excitatory neurons. We also allow for the possibility of both direct
feedback, and feedbacks that emphasize changes in cortical

T e ͑ ␻ ͒ ϭG ee ⌿ ͑ ␻ ͒ ␶ ͑ ␻ ͒ /G es ,

ͩ

q 2 ͑ ␻ ͒ r 2e ϭ 1Ϫ

i␻
␥e

ͪ

2

Ϫ

G ee ͓ 1ϩ⌿ ͑ ␻ ͒ ␶ ͑ ␻ ͔͒ L ͑ ␻ ͒
.
1ϪG ii L ͑ ␻ ͒

͑16͒

͑17͒

In ͑11͒–͑17͒ linearization is implicitly carried out relative to
steady states of the combined corticothalamic system, not the
cortex alone. The steady state values in Table I refer to the
combined system.

021903-4

PREDICTION OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC . . .

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

ͯ

III. ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC SPECTRA

In this section we derive the form of the EEG spectrum
from the transfer function ͑15͒. We then derive analytic
forms for quantities such as the ␻ ϭ0 stability boundaries of
the system, the asymptotic forms of the spectrum at high and
low frequencies, and breakpoints between different ranges.
We also examine the effects on the spectrum of filtering
through the cerebrospinal fluid, skull, and scalp.
A. Filtering by overlying structures

In calculating scalp EEG spectra ͑rather than intracranial
ones at the cortical surface͒, one must consider the possibility of filtering due to shielding that results from volume conduction by the cerebrospinal fluid, skull, and the scalp itself
͓10,20,40͔. Filtering of high spatial frequencies k can be significant, as found by Srinivasan et al. ͓40͔. The k dependence
of their low-to-moderate wave number results is reasonably
well fitted by a spatial filter of the form
F ͑ k ͒ ϭe Ϫk

2 /k 2
0

͑18͒

,

where F(k) is the square of the ratio of scalp to cortical
voltage and k 0 Ϸ30 mϪ1 . We show in Appendix B that the
precise form of this function does not significantly affect the
form of the final spectra calculated, so we use the form ͑18͒
because it allows the spectrum to be evaluated in a convenient closed form.

ϭ PN

ϫIm͓ exp͑ q * 2 /k 20 ͒ E 1 ͑ q * 2 /k 20 ͔͒ ,
2
P N ϭ ␲ ͉ ␾ N2 ͉ G es
/r 2e ,

P͑ ␻ ͒ϭ
ϭ

͵␾
͉

͉ ␾ N2 ͉

r 4e

e ͑ k, ␻ ͒ ͉

ͯ

2

͑19͒

F͑ k ͒d 2k

G es L ͑ ␻ ͒
1ϪG ii L ͑ ␻ ͒

ͯ͵
2

F͑ k ͒d 2k
͉ k 2 ϩq 2 ͉ 2

͑20͒

͑21͒
͑22͒

where ␪ is the complex argument of q 2 , ͉ ␾ N2 ͉ is the whitenoise power level in Fourier space, and E 1 is the exponential
integral function ͓42͔, with
ϱ

E 1 ͑ z ͒ ϭϪ ␥ Ϫln zϪ

͚

jϭ1

͑ Ϫz ͒ j
,
j j!

͑23͒

for ͉ arg z ͉ Ͻ ␲ , where ␥ ϭ0.5772 . . . is Euler’s constant. The
spectrum ͑21͒ has been calculated for the specific form ͑18͒
of F(k).
The limit k 0 →ϱ corresponds to the absence of volume
conduction and, in the related limit ͉ q 2 ͉ /k 20 →0, we find that
͑21͒ simplifies to

ͯ

P͑ ␻ ͒ϭ PN

ͯ

2
L͑ ␻ ͒
␪
.
2 2
1ϪG ii L ͑ ␻ ͒ ͉ q r e ͉ sin ␪

͑24͒

In the opposite limit, ͉ q 2 ͉ /k 20 ӷ1, expansion of ͑21͒ in powers of k 20 /q 2 yields

B. Spectra

EEGs result from fields generated as charges flow in and
out of neural membranes as neurons fire and the resulting
signals propagate. Hence, we assume that the observed signals primarily result from the firing of excitatory neurons,
since these are larger and much more numerous than inhibitory ones, and have a higher degree of spatial alignment,
which implies they contribute more coherently to the total
signal ͓10͔. Further reasons for ignoring ␾ i are that its transfer function is proportional to the one for ␾ e at small k
͑thereby giving only a multiplicative correction͒, while volume conduction filters out both signals at large k ͓10,40͔. We
see below that the bulk of the EEG power is at large scales
where both fields have the same spectral profile in any case.
Stimuli to the cortex have complicated temporal and spatial dependences. We approximate these here by assuming
that their total ␾ N consists of white noise in space and time,
which is effectively filtered via its interaction with the cortex
to yield the EEG spectrum. This picture is consistent with
recent results that indicate that at least the alpha frequency
range is consistent with linearly filtered noise in most cases
͓7,41͔, although in 1.25% of cases possible evidence of nonlinear behavior was found.
The resulting spectrum is

ͯ

2
L͑ ␻ ͒
1
2 2
1ϪG ii L ͑ ␻ ͒ ͉ q r e ͉ sin ␪

P ͑ ␻ ͒ ϭ P ϱ͑ ␻ ͒

k 20 sin ␪
͉ q 2͉ ␪

,

͑25͒

where P ϱ ( ␻ ) is the spectrum given by ͑24͒. At large frequencies, where ͉ q 2 ͉ becomes large and ͉ ␪ ͉ Ϸ ␲ , this implies
an asymptotic frequency filtering function
F ͑ ␻ ͒ Ϸ ␻ F3 / ␻ 3 ,

͑26͒

with a turnover frequency of

␻ F Ϸ ␥ e ͑ 2k 20 r 2e / ␲ ͒ 1/3.

͑27͒

For the parameters in Table I, the turnover frequency occurs
at about 30 Hz—too high to significantly affect the main part
of the frequency spectrum. Equation ͑26͒ does not have the
form F( ␻ )ϭexp(Ϫ␻2v2/k20) one might naively expect from
͑18͒ for a dispersion relation whose real part has the
asymptotic form ␻ ϭk v . This difference occurs because of
damping, which implies that ␻ is the solution of the complex
dispersion relation ͑16͒. Hence, the Fourier transform of
waves satisfying this relation has a Lorentzian profile in the
real part of ␻ , giving F( ␻ )ϰ ␻ Ϫ2 ; the actual ␻ Ϫ3 dependence comes about because of the detailed structure of ͑21͒,
which causes the coefficient of the ␻ Ϫ2 term in an expansion
in powers of ␻ Ϫ1 to be zero.
The shape of the spectrum depends strongly on the locus
of q 2 in the complex plane, with instability occurring if this
locus crosses the negative real axis, which corresponds to q
itself acquiring a negative real part, consistent with earlier

021903-5

P. A. ROBINSON et al.

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

ing spectral distortions that would otherwise occur due to the
effects of volume conduction ͓10,40͔. This point is explored
further in Sec. IV.
D. Features of the underlying spectrum

FIG. 3. Theoretical EEG power spectrum P( f )/ P N and q 2 r 2e .
Parameters are ␥ e ϭ110 sϪ1 , ␣ ϭ70 sϪ1 , ␤ / ␣ ϭ4, t 0 ϭ0.07 s,
G ii ϭϪ1, G ee ϭ1, ␩ 1 ϭ ␩ 2 ϭ150 sϪ1 , nϭ1, ␺ ϭ1, ␺ Ј ϭ0, and k 0
ϭ30 mϪ1 , implying Sϭ0. ͑a͒ Spectrum P( f )/ P N . ͑b͒ Locus of
q 2 r 2e for ␻ Ͼ0.

work ͓21,22͔. Stability at ␻ ϭ0 corresponds to Re͓ q 2 (0) ͔
Ͼ0, Im͓ q 2 (0) ͔ ϭ0, and ␪ (0)ϭ0, implying that we can define a stability parameter S

Sϭ1Ϫ

G ee ͑ 1ϩ ␺ ͒
,
1ϪG ii

͑28͒

that must satisfy Sу0 for the system to avoid instability at
␻ ϭ0 ͑this is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for
overall stability͒.

In this section we temporarily ignore the spectral peaks
͑which are discussed in Sec. V͒ and examine the properties
of the smooth, underlying spectrum. At very low frequencies
͑21͒ implies P( ␻ )Ϸ P(0), with ␪ ( ␻ )Ϸ0 and, hence,
͑30͒

G 0 ϭ1ϪG ii ,

͑31͒

ϱ

2

͑ ␻ ͒ r 2e ϭ

C. Illustrative spectrum

Mϭ

l
͓ max͕ 0,ϪRe͑ q 2 r 2e ͒ ͖ ͔ 1/2,
2␲re

͚

jϭ0

A j ͑ Ϫi ␻ ͒ j ,

͑32͒

the structure of ͑17͒ implies that all the A j are real. Explicit
expressions for A 0 and A 1 are found in Appendix C.
The case A 0 ϭ0 corresponds to Sϭ0 ͑see Appendix C͒
and, hence, to marginal stability, a condition that favors
complex dynamics, such as actually seen in EEG recordings
͓41͔. If A 0 is small and A 1 0, there is a small-␻ regime in
which q 2 ( ␻ )ϷϪi ␻ A 1 . In this case, one finds ␪ ϷϮ ␲ /2 for
␻ Ͼ0 and
P͑ ␻ ͒Ϸ

PN
␲
.
G 20 2 ␻ ͉ A 1 ͉

͑33͒

Such a regime with P( ␻ )ϰ ␻ Ϫ1 was recently observed in
magnetoencephalographic observations ͓16͔. Significantly,
all the model parameters other than k 0 affect the behavior in
this regime, via A 1 .
If A 0 and A 1 are both very small, the jϭ2 term in ͑32͒
will dominate in magnitude over the jϭ3 term at small ␻
unless A 2 Ϸ0, while the jϭ3 term dominates the imaginary
part of q 2 . Assuming that A 2 is not too close to zero, two
cases exist: if A 2 Ͼ0, ␪ ϷϮ ␲ and
P͑ ␻ ͒ϭ

͑29͒

and the characteristic width of the integrand in M is of order
(l/2␲ r e ) ͓ Im(q 2 r 2e ) ͔ 1/2. Figure 3͑b͒ thus shows that M is
small up to at least the beta frequency. This implies that
EEGs in this regime are spatially large scale, thereby reduc-

G 20 S

provided the system is stable (SϾ0) and ͉ q 2 ͉ Ӷk 20 . This prediction is in accord with the physical expectation that a small
stability parameter will be associated with high EEG power.
In this regime, only S and G 0 affect the power for constant
P N ; none of the feedback parameters affect the power level.
If S is small, q 2 (0)Ϸ0 and the behavior of P( ␻ ) at small
␻ depends on the leading terms in the expansion of q 2 ( ␻ ) in
powers of ␻ . If we write
q

Figure 3͑a͒ shows an illustrative spectrum obtained from
͑21͒ for parameters typical of those in Table I. Alpha and
beta peaks ͑plus weak, higher-frequency ones͒, are seen near
8 Hz and 22 Hz, respectively, superposed on a smooth underlying spectrum which has approximately f Ϫ5 behavior at
large f, f Ϫ1 behavior for 0.4 Hz Շ f Շ3 Hz, and levels off as
f →0. Figure 3͑b͒ shows the corresponding locus of q 2 ( ␻ )
for ␻ Ͼ0. After starting near the origin at f ϭ0, q 2 increases
in modulus, with q 2 ( ␻ )ϰ ␻ , where P( f )ϰ f Ϫ1 . Feedback
then causes the curve to loop back toward the origin several
times, producing correlated alpha, beta, and higher frequency
enhancements. Finally, the locus recedes along an asymptotically parabolic path in the regime with P( f )ϰ f Ϫ5 until filtering via volume conduction cuts in, and P( f )ϰ f Ϫ8 thereafter, although the latter regime is not fully attained even at
100 Hz. The onset of dendritic filtering produces the noticeable knee in the spectrum at ␻ Ϸ ␣ , thereby restricting the
potential range of the f Ϫ1 spectrum to ␻ Շ ␣ .
Momentarily ignoring F(k), the integrand in ͑20͒ peaks
where k 2 ϭmax͕0,ϪRe q 2 ͖ , and has a characteristic width of
͉ Im q 2 ͉ . Hence, in a cortex of characteristic linear size l, the
mode number M at which the integrand peaks is

PN

,

P͑ 0 ͒ϭ

PN
G 20

␲
.
͉ A 3͉ ␻ 3

͑34͒

1
.
͉ A 2͉ ␻ 2

͑35͒

If A 2 Ͻ0, ␪ Ϸ ␲ A 3 /A 2 , and

021903-6

P͑ ␻ ͒ϭ

PN
G 20

PREDICTION OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC . . .

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

Regimes exist with these behaviors provided A 0 Ϸ0 ͑which
implies SϷ0), and A 1 Ϸ0. Higher order cancellations of the
first few terms in ͑32͒ may occur, but such occurrences represent increasingly smaller zones of parameter space, so we
do not consider them in this paper. If A 2 Ͼ0 the condition
A 1 ϭ0 defines a stability boundary of the system, since q 2
crosses the negative imaginary axis infinitesimally close to
the origin at ␻ ϭ0 in this case.
In applying ͑34͒ and ͑35͒, the condition Sϭ0 implies an
interrelationship between G ee , G ii , and ␺ , via ͑28͒. Likewise, the condition A 1 ϭ0 at Sϭ0 requires

␺

ͩ

ͪ

ͩ

ͪ

2
2
2
n
n
2
ϩ
ϩt 0 ϩ ϩ
Ϫ ␺ Ј t 0 ϭϪ
ϩ
,
␥e ␣G0
␩1 ␩2
␥e ␣G0
͑36͒

where Eq. ͑C2͒ of Appendix C has been used.
At high frequencies with ␻ Ͼ ␣ the term (1Ϫi ␻ / ␥ e ) 2 on
the right-hand side of ͑17͒ dominates, ␪ ϷϪ ␲ for ␻ Ͼ0,
͉ q 2 r 2e ͉ sin ␪ϷϪ2␥e /␻, and ͉ L( ␻ ) ͉ 2 Ϸ ␣ 2 ␤ 2 / ␻ 4 . If volume
conduction is not important, these scalings give
P͑ ␻ ͒ϭ

P N␲ ␣ 2␤ 2␥ e
,
2␻5

͑37͒

in this range, provided ͉ G ii L( ␻ ) ͉ Շ1 ͓22͔. In this regime, the
power level is most sensitive to ␣ and ␤ , with a weaker
dependence on ␥ e , while the feedback parameters have no
effect. If volume conduction is strong ( ␻ ӷ ␻ F ), the filtering
factor in ͑25͒ must be included, steepening the spectrum to
an ␻ Ϫ8 dependence. In addition, the existence of an ␻ Ϫ1
regime requires ͉ G ii L( ␻ ) ͉ տ1. Hence,
2
2
1ϩ ␻ max
/ ␤ 2 Ͻ ͉ G ii ͉ Շ1ϩ ␻ min
/ ␤ 2,

͑38͒

where ␻ min is the minimum frequency of any observed ␻ Ϫ5
regime and ␻ max is the maximum frequency of any observed
␻ Ϫ1 regime.
IV. PARAMETER SENSITIVITIES AND SIMPLIFIED
MODEL

In this section we examine how the spectrum ͑21͒ varies
with each of the model parameters ␥ e , ␣ , ␤ , G ii , G ee , ␺ ,
␺ Ј , t 0 , n, ␩ m ͑with ␩ 1 ϭ ␩ 2 assumed for convenience͒, and
k 0 . Except for the parameter being varied at any given time,
the parameters are identical to those of Fig. 3 throughout this
section and P N is fixed. We term the values in Fig. 3 ‘‘nominal’’ for convenience. Possible correlations between changes
in parameters due to their common dependence on steady
state firing rates, for example, are not included here; only
one parameter at a time is varied.
Toward the end of this section, we argue that several of
the model’s parameters can be absorbed into one another for
most purposes, leaving a simplified model with fewer parameters for fitting to the shapes of experimental spectra. We
also clarify the a priori physiological constraints on these
parameters. Further simplifications are made in Sec. VI,
where the number of parameters is further reduced by one in
the case of marginally stable spectra.

Figure 4͑a͒ shows the effect of varying ␥ e from 70 to 150
sϪ1 ͑nominal value: 110 sϪ1 ). At high f, Pϰ ␥ e is satisfied in
accord with ͑37͒, whereas there is little effect at low f, as
expected from ͑30͒.
Figure 4͑b͒ shows the effect of varying ␣ from 40 to 100
sϪ1 ͑nominal value: 70 sϪ1 ), with ␤ / ␣ ϭ4 fixed. For f
տ ␣ , Pϰ ␣ 4 , in accord with the effects of dendritic filtering
incorporated in ͑37͒. However, dependence on ␣ ͑via A 1 ) is
weak in the f Ϫ1 regime, in agreement with ͑33͒. The corresponding loci of q 2 r 2e have loops that expand and approach
the origin as ␣ increases, producing the enhanced peaks
seen—for a strong alpha peak to be seen at a frequency ␻ ␣ ,
one must have ␣ տ ␻ ␣ . The effects of increasing the ratio
␤ / ␣ from 1 to 7 ͑nominal value: 4͒, seen in Fig. 4͑c͒, are
quite similar to those of increasing ␣ itself, in the frequency
ratio of interest—higher ␤ / ␣ corresponds to less dendritic
filtering, more clearly visible spectral peaks, and a shallower
͑as ␻ Ϫ3 rather than ␻ Ϫ5 ) fall-off at frequencies ␣ Շ ␻ Շ ␤ ,
before the onset of an ␻ Ϫ5 tail for ␻ տ ␤ .
Figure 4͑d͒ shows the effect of varying G ii from Ϫ0.5 to
Ϫ1.5 ͑nominal value: Ϫ1). For G ii ϭϪ0.5,Ϫ1, Sр0 is satisfied, leading to a 1/f spectrum, with instability at f ϭ0 in
the first case (q 2 intersects the negative real axis at ␻ ϭ0),
and marginal stability in the second. For G ii ϭϪ1.5, SϾ0
holds, and a plateau occurs at low f, as in ͑30͒. Below a few
Hz, P decreases as G 0 increases in all cases, in accord with
͑30͒ and ͑33͒. The main effect at higher frequencies is that
the alpha and beta resonances weaken with increasing G 0 , a
reflection of contracted loops of q 2 in the complex plane.
Similar effects are seen in Fig. 4͑e͒, in which G ee is varied
from 0.5 to 1.5 ͑nominal value: 1͒. This leads primarily to a
steepening of the spectrum at low f due to the onset of instability at f ϭ0 for G ee Ͼ1, plus some sharpening of the spectral peaks owing to expansion of the q 2 loops.
Figure 4͑f͒ shows the effect of varying the direct corticothalamic feedback parameter ␺ from Ϫ0.5 to 2.5 ͑nominal
value: 1͒. Larger ͉ ␺ ͉ increases the magnitudes of the spectral
peaks, and the low-f component of the spectrum as f ϭ0
instability is approached, while negative ␺ results in an inversion of the peaks and troughs, with new peaks appearing
midway between the original ones, which are replaced by
troughs; the new peaks are still weak for ␺ ϭϪ0.5. Note that
there is a 1/f low-frequency component for ␺ ϭ0,2.5,
whereas there is a plateau for Ϫ0.5 because SϾ0 in this
case. Variation of the final gain-related parameter ␺ Ј from
Ϫ0.6 to 0.6 ͑nominal value: 0͒ is explored in Fig. 4͑g͒. As
͉ ␺ Ј ͉ increases the peaks sharpen and become more pronounced. As ␺ Ј increases there is an increase in the frequencies of the alpha and beta peaks, with a corresponding reduction in their frequency ratio from just below 3 at large
negative ␺ Ј to just above 2 at large positive ␺ Ј , a phenomenon that will be further examined in Sec. V. Note that the
second q 2 loop is larger than the first in this case, because
the magnitude of the differential feedback term peaks for
nonzero ␻ . Finally, variations in ␺ Ј produce shifts in the
normalization of the f Ϫ1 range, as expected from ͑33͒. Although ͑34͒ and ͑36͒ imply that an f Ϫ3 regime should be
attainable for suitable ␺ Ј , an instability at nonzero f inter-

021903-7

P. A. ROBINSON et al.

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

FIG. 4. Dependence of spectra P( f )/ P N and q 2 r 2e on individual parameters, with other parameters fixed at the values used
in Fig. 3. Solid, dotted, and dashed curves are used in order of increasing magnitude of the parameter being varied. In each of the rows
͑a͒–͑k͒ the left frame shows P( f )/ P N and the right shows q 2 r 2e for f Ͼ0. In each case one of the curves is the same as that in the
corresponding frame of Fig. 3. ͑a͒ ␥ e ϭ70,110,150 sϪ1 , ͑b͒ ␣ ϭ40,70,110 sϪ1 , ͑c͒ ␤ / ␣ ϭ1,4,7, ͑d͒ G ii ϭϪ0.5,Ϫ1.0,Ϫ1.5, ͑e͒ G ee
ϭ0.5,1.0,1.5, ͑f͒ ␺ ϭϪ0.5,1,2.5, ͑g͒ ␺ Ј ϭϪ0.6,0,0.6, ͑h͒ t 0 ϭ0.03,0.07,0.11 s, ͑i͒ nϭ0,1,2, ͑j͒ ␩ 1 , ␩ 2 ϭ50,150,250 sϪ1 , ͑k͒ k 0
ϭ20,30,40 mϪ1 .
021903-8

PREDICTION OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC . . .

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

venes first for the parameters considered when ͉ ␺ Ј ͉ is further
increased. We consider this point further in Sec. VI.
The main effects of increasing the time delay t 0 in the
corticothalamic loop are to reduce the alpha and beta frequencies, and sharpen the peaks, as shown in Fig. 4͑h͒, the
latter effect due to there being less thalamic filtering at low
frequencies. Similar effects are seen with changes in n, ␩ 1 ,
and ␩ 2 , as seen in Figs 4͑i͒ and 4͑j͒. There are also weak
effects on the normalization of the f Ϫ1 regime, as expected
from ͑33͒. These four parameters leave the high-f part of the
spectrum essentially unchanged.
Figure 4͑k͒ shows the effect of varying the characteristic
wave number k 0 above which volume conduction filters out
cortical signals. There is little effect on the shape of the
spectrum below about 25 Hz, but a substantial steepening
above this point for small k 0 , in agreement with the semiquantitative estimate ͑26͒.
In summary, Fig. 4 shows that for fixed P N only ␣ , ␤ ,
␥ e , and k 0 significantly affect the high frequency spectrum,
in accord with ͑26͒ and ͑37͒. The lowest frequencies are only
affected by G ii , G ee , and ␺ , via their effects on S, which
occurs in ͑30͒. The f Ϫ1 spectrum is affected moderately by
all parameters, with its existence depending most strongly on
the value of S, which replaces it with a low-f plateau if it is
significantly greater than zero. Large values of ␣ , ␤ , G ii ,
͉ ␺ ͉ , ͉ ␺ Ј ͉ , ␩ 1 , and ␩ 2 tend to sharpen the peaks, while t 0 , ␩ ,
n, ␺ , and ␺ Ј are the chief determinants of the peak frequencies.
Having examined the variation of the predicted spectrum
with each of our model’s parameters. We note that when
fitting experimental data, a model with fewer parameters
would tend to give fits that were simpler to interpret and of
higher statistical significance. Published EEG data usually
span only the range 1–40 Hz or thereabout, sometimes as
great a range as 0.1–100 Hz, or as little as 2–30 Hz. Figure
4 shows that these ranges are unlikely to be sufficient to
distinguish all the model parameters unambiguously, particularly once the effects of noise are included. Hence, there is
little point in distinguishing all these parameters theoretically. Following this argument, we note that increases in ␤
have effects similar to increasing ␣ in the frequency range of
interest, so these two parameters can be replaced by a common effective value of ␣ for most purposes, giving L( ␻ )
ϭ(1Ϫi ␻ / ␣ ) Ϫ2 in ͑4͒. Similarly, the effects of n, ␩ 1 , and ␩ 2
are quite similar to those of t 0 provided n is nonzero ͑otherwise the differential feedback becomes unphysically large in
magnitude at high frequencies͒. Hence, we can approximate
these parameters by setting nϭ1 and ␩ 1 ϭ ␩ 2 ϭ ␣ , which implies ␶ ( ␻ )ϭe i ␻ t 0 L( ␻ ) in ͑14͒. The remaining model has
only seven parameters ͑rather than 11͒, aside from the overall normalization of the spectrum. In Sec. VI, the likely restriction to SϷ0 reduces this to only six parameters aside
from normalization. At the cortical surface, k 0 is also irrelevant, leaving one fewer parameter still. There is also the
possibility that the dependence of scalp spectra on k 0 will not
be experimentally distinguishable from the effects due to ␥ e
and ␣ .
When fitting to experimental data, we emphasize that the

normalization is set by the observed root-mean-square ͑rms͒
signal, while the other parameters are not completely free,
since physiology constrains them, in some cases quite
strongly ͑see Table I͒. For example, the characteristic range
r e of excitatory axons has been measured, as have axonal
signal velocities v . These measurements constrain ␥ e to
within roughly Ϯ40% of its best estimate of 110 sϪ1 . Likewise, the dendritic rate constant ␣ is known to be within
roughly a factor of two of 100 sϪ1 , with a major uncertainty
arising from the difficulty of assigning a single rate to describe all the different neural and synaptic types. Similarly,
500 sϪ1 տ ␤ is probably satisfied, and ␤ у ␣ can be assumed
without loss of generality ͑in the simplified version of our
model we set ␤ ϭ ␣ and the resulting effective value of ␣
then lies somewhere between 50 and 500 sϪ1 ).
Although their signs are strictly known, the values of G ee
and G ii are less well constrained by physiology, with typical
magnitudes estimated to lie between roughly 1 and 100,
based on the values in Table I. The ratio ͉ G ee /G ii ͉ is somewhat better constrained, with a value of 1–5 times the ratio
(0)
Q (0)
e /Q i ϳ1 of the steady-state firing rates in the two neural
populations ͓see ͑1͔͒. Since normal EEG and magnetoencephalographic ͓16͔ spectra peak strongly at low frequencies,
S must be small and non-negative to ensure a significant f Ϫ1 ,
f Ϫ2 , or f Ϫ3 spectral range while avoiding instability. Likewise, if SϷ0, A 1 Ͼ0 is required whenever A 2 Ͼ0 to avoid a
low-f instability—a condition that restricts combinations of
parameters via ͑36͒ and via an analogous expression for the
locus on which A 2 ϭ0.
The magnitude of ⌿ must be of order unity to be consistent with physiological knowledge that the thalamus has
strong, but not overwhelming, effects on the cortex and its
state of attention, and that the cortex likewise projects
strongly to the thalamus ͓37–39͔. Thus, although corticothalamic connections ͑in both directions͒ are much less numerous than corticocortical ones, these connections must be
more effective in stimulating the cortex than their numbers
imply—e.g., as a result of larger s b values than for other
fibers, or because they have more axonal synapses than average. Hence, ͉ ␺ ͉ and/or ͉ ␺ Ј ␣ t 0 ͉ are probably of order unity
in some states, the latter being the maximal magnitude of the
differential feedback term ␻ t 0 ␺ Ј ␶ ( ␻ ) if ␣ ϳ ␤ , ␩ 1 , ␩ 2 .
The value of the delay t 0 ͑including corticothalamic dendritic delays͒ must be of order 25–100 ms, since the latency
for signals to reach the cortex from the thalamus is ϳ25 ms
͓8͔ and there is presumably a similar delay in the reverse
direction, plus some shorter intrathalamic delays. Although
2
and ͉ ␾ N2 ͉ in the normalization ͑22͒ are not
the factors G es
separately observable, they do not constitute free parameters
of the spectral shape, and variations of the magnitude of the
2
͉ ␾ N2 ͉ can be determined experimentally.
normalization G es
Finally, the volume conduction turnover wave number k 0
can be estimated from the electrical conductivities and thicknesses of the various tissues overlying the cortex ͓40͔, giving
k 0 Ϸ30 mϪ1 .
V. SPECTRAL PEAKS

In this section we turn our attention to the EEG spectral
peaks, which are of central importance to practical electro-

021903-9

P. A. ROBINSON et al.

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

encephalography, where they are often termed rhythms. We
use the simplified model introduced in the preceding section
to avoid an unnecessarily complicated discussion. The effects of spatial filtering are also ignored, since the preceding
section implies that these are only significant for frequencies
above those of the major rhythms. We estimate the locations
of the peaks and the resulting frequency ratios, the sharpness
of the peaks, and the conditions for onset of instabilities. In
doing this, we unify all the peaks observed into a single
theoretical framework in which each peak is distinguished by
a unique number and a theoretical basis is obtained for the
customary subdivision of the spectrum into bands.
A. Frequencies and occurrence of spectral peaks

Some numerical experimentation shows that the factor in
͑24͒ that dominates in determining the frequencies of spectral peaks is the variation of Im q 2 r 2e ϭ ͉ q 2 r 2e ͉ sin ␪. We find
that the dominant behavior can be approximated in the limits
␻ 2 Ӷ ␣ 2 and ␻ 2 ӷ ␣ 2 by
Im q 2 r 2e ϭϪ

2x
ϪB ͑ ␻ ͒ G ee ͓ ␺ sin xϪx ␺ Ј cos x ͔ , ͑39͒
␥ et 0

␻ 2Ӷ ␣ 2

B ͑ ␻ ͒ Ϸ1/G 0 ,
ϳ ␣ 4/ ␻ 4,

␣ 2Ӷ ␻ 2,

xϭ ␻ t 0 .

͑40͒
͑41͒
͑42͒

Since the first term on the right-hand side of ͑39͒ is negative
͑for positive x, which is assumed henceforth͒, peaks of P( ␻ )
occur approximately where the term in square brackets has
its maximum negative value of Ϫ ͉ ⌿ ͉ . The factor B( ␻ ) in
͑39͒ and the factor ␪ in the numerator in ͑24͒ act to downshift the frequencies from those we will shortly predict using
the above argument, with this shift increasing for ␻ Ͼ ␣
where the fractional rate of change of B( ␻ ) becomes large.
However, the present approach is adequate to predict the
main trends semiquantitatively, while numerical results easily yield more accurate peak frequencies when required.
We find that the maximum negative values of the term in
square brackets in ͑39͒ are attained for
sin xϭϪ ␺ / ͉ ⌿ ͉ ,

͑43͒

cos xϭ ␺ Ј x/ ͉ ⌿ ͉ .

͑44͒

For ␺ Ј ϭ0, these equations yield peaks at
x m ϭ ͑ mϪ 21 ͒ ␲ ,

͑45͒

with peak index mϭ2,4, . . . for ␺ Ͼ0 and mϭ1,3,5, . . . for
␺ Ͻ0. For ͉ ␺ Ј x m / ␺ ͉ ӷ1 we find x m is given by ͑45͒ with the
addition of a term sign( ␺ ) ␲ /2. An approximate result, valid
for all ␺ Ј , is

␻ m t 0 Ϸx m ϩsinϪ1 ͑ ␺ Ј x m / ͉ ⌿ m ͉ ͒ sign͑ ␺ ͒ ,

͑46͒

2 1/2
͉ ⌿ m͉ ϭ ͑ ␺ 2ϩ ␺ Ј2x m
͒ ,

͑47͒

FIG. 5. Peak frequencies predicted from ͑46͒ as functions of
␺ Ј / ␺ . Solid lines represent peaks that occur for ␺ Ͼ0 ͑troughs
for ␺ Ͻ0) while dashed lines represent peaks for ␺ Ͻ0 ͑troughs for
␺ Ͼ0).

with sign(u)ϭ0 for uϭ0 here and x m given by ͑45͒. The
approximate frequency given by ͑46͒ increases monotonically from (mϪ1) ␲ to m ␲ as ␺ Ј increases from Ϫϱ to ϱ,
as was illustrated in Fig. 4͑g͒. Note that there is a discontinuity in ␻ m as a function of ␺ Ј at ␺ Ј ϭ0 in the case ␺ ϭ0.
Figure 5 shows the dependence of ␻ m on ␺ Ј / ␺ for various m, as obtained from ͑46͒. The solid and dashed lines
correspond to peaks and troughs in the spectrum for ␺ Ͼ0,
and the reverse for ␺ Ͻ0. On each curve ␻ m t 0 passes
through a range of ␲ as ␺ Ј increases, with most of the
change concentrated in the range ͉ ␺ Ј ͉ Շ1/( ␻ m t 0 ). The frequency ratio between successive peaks decreases as ␺ Ј increases, which may enable the ratio ␺ Ј / ␺ to be determined
experimentally. Typical ratios f ␤ / f ␣ of the beta to alpha
frequencies are very close to 2 ͑see Fig. 1, for example͒. This
is consistent with the association mϭ2 for alpha and mϭ4
for beta, if 2 ␲ ␺ Ј / ␺ տ1 and ␺ Ͼ0 in the waking state, giving
a frequency ratio just over 2. It is also consistent with m
ϭ3 for alpha and mϭ5 for beta, if 2 ␲ ␺ Ј / ␺ ՇϪ1 and ␺
Ͻ0, which leads to a frequency ratio just less than 2. ͑Physiologically, positive feedback with ␺ Ͼ0 is expected in the
waking state, also favoring the first scenario ͓12͔.͒ The sleep
spindle peak appears roughly midway between the alpha and
beta peaks, as illustrated in Fig. 1, qualitatively consistent
with the two scenarios just mentioned, for mϭ3 and mϭ4,
respectively. The largest qualitative difference between the
two scenarios is that there is another nonzero-f waking peak
below the alpha peak in the case ␺ Ͻ0; however, in practice,
this may not be distinguishable from the 1/f peak ͑present in
both waking and sleeping states at marginal stability, and to
which we assign the value mϭ0 for completeness͒. It seems
that the most promising method of distinguishing the two
possibilities is detailed comparison of the ratio f ␤ / f ␣ , as
determined from the full spectral formula ͑22͒, with
experiment—if this ratio definitely exceeds 2, one has the
simplest possible correspondence between the peak index of
observed and predicted peaks, as listed in Table II. In determining this ratio, one must be careful to correct for downshifts due to the decrease of the smooth underlying spectrum,
an effect that becomes stronger at high frequencies.

021903-10

PREDICTION OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC . . .

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

TABLE II. Association between rhythms at f Ͻ40 Hz and the
resonances discussed in Sec. V. The first column gives the peak
index m, the second its designation on the assumption ␺ Ј / ␺ Ͼ1/␲ ,
the third its nominal frequency in Hz based on an alpha frequency
of 10 Hz, the fourth the corresponding nominal frequency range in
Hz of the associated sub-band, and the fifth whether it has a peak in
sleeping or waking states. The sixth column gives the peak frequencies in Hz inferred from the data displayed in Figs. 1 and 6 ͑the
nominal ones should be multiplied by 0.95, the ratio of the actual to
nominal alpha frequencies, for comparison with these data͒. The
frequency of the delta peak was obtained from Fig. 1. Dashes indicate where no peak was observed in this instance. The conventional
bands are deltaϭ0–3.5 Hz, thetaϭ4–7.5 Hz, alphaϭ8–13 Hz, beta
ϭ14–30 Hz, and gammaϭabove 30 Hz.
m

Rhythm

f

Band

State

Data

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

delta
theta
alpha
spindle ͑sp.͒
beta
beta-2 sp.
beta-2
gamma-1 sp.
gamma-1

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

0–2.5
2.5–7.5
7.5–12.5
12.5–17.5
17.5–22.5
22.5–27.5
27.5–32.5
32.5–37.5
37.5–42.5

both
sleep
wake
sleep
wake
sleep
wake
sleep
wake

Ͻ0.2
4.6Ϯ0.5
9.5Ϯ0.5
14Ϯ0.5
19Ϯ1
23Ϯ1
26Ϯ2
33Ϯ2

In either scenario for the ratio ␺ Ј / ␺ discussed in the previous paragraphs, the ratio ␺ Ј / ␺ has the same sign in both
sleeping and waking states, even when ␺ changes sign ͑i.e.,
␺ and ␺ Ј appear to change sign at roughly the same point͒.
The simplest feedback architecture consistent with this is one
in which any thalamic signal inversion occurs at a common
structure through which both the direct and differential feedback signals pass. A very likely candidate for such a structure is the thalamic reticular nucleus because there is wide
agreement that, in sleep, connections from this nucleus
strongly inhibit other thalamic nuclei ͓12,14,43͔. The enhanced inhibitory influence of the thalamic reticular nucleus
combined with the existence of an otherwise excitatory feedback loop from the cortex through the thalamic reticular
nucleus to other thalamic nuclei and thence back to the cortex, is the reason that both ␺ and ␺ Ј might change sign in
sleep relative to waking states. A third possible scenario is
one in which the even-m resonances alone determine the
spectral peaks, with a shift in ␺ Ј / ␺ from large positive values in waking to large negative ones in sleep, with the consequent frequency downshift allowing each resonance to account for one waking peak and a sleep peak roughly 5 Hz
below it. However, this possibility requires an additional argument as to why the odd-m peaks never seem to contribute.
A fourth and final possibility, that suffers from the same
problems as the third, is that the opposite trend in ␺ Ј / ␺ may
occur, allowing each even-m resonance to account for a waking peak and a sleep peak roughly 5 Hz higher in frequency.
We discuss the distinction between these scenarios further at
the end of Sec. VI.
If we assume the association between m and spectral
rhythm given in Table II, we find that the alpha (mϭ2) and

FIG. 6. Ratios of sleep spectra in Fig. 1 to the corresponding
waking spectra. The regions at 49–50 Hz should be ignored, as they
have been contaminated by the 50 Hz mains frequency. ͑a͒ Ratios
obtained at Cz ͑solid curve͒, Fz ͑dashed͒, Pz ͑dotted͒, C3 ͑dashed–
dotted pattern͒, and C4 ͑dashed–triple-dotted pattern͒ electrodes.
͑b͒ Mean ratio ͑solid curve͒ bracketed by the interelectrode standard deviations ͑dashed curves͒. Vertical lines are at the first to
seventh multiples of 4.75 Hz, the locations of peaks and troughs
predicted on the basis of an alpha frequency of 9.5 Hz.

beta (mϭ4) peaks should be positively correlated with each
other, and with a new mϭ6 peak at roughly three times the
alpha frequency. We term this the beta-2 peak, a nomenclature that we will justify in the next paragraph. This peak is
seen at roughly three times the alpha frequency in Fig. 1,
located on the wing of the beta peak, from which it is not
well resolved in this example ͑see the discussion of Fig. 6
below for further analysis͒. The predicted alpha–beta correlation has been observed in recent work ͓44͔. Similarly, we
expect that peaks at mϭ1 ͑theta or delta rhythm, whose peak
may blend smoothly into the 1/f peak in many practical situations͒, mϭ3 ͑sleep spindles; which we denote by the symbol ␴ ␤ 1 since they occur in the lower part of what is commonly termed the beta band͒, and mϭ5 will be positively
correlated with each other, and negatively correlated with the
alpha, beta, and gamma peaks. Since the latter peaks occur in
the waking state, they are obviously anticorrelated with sleep
spindles, which are only seen during sleep. Evidence for an
anticorrelation between theta and alpha power in the waking
state has also been presented recently ͓45͔, while theta and
delta are well known to be most prominent in deep sleep,
especially sleep stage 2 ͓17,18͔. We term the mϭ5 rhythm,
which has not previously been discussed, beta-2 sleep
spindles ͑symbol ␴ ␤ 2 , since they occupy the upper part of
the conventional beta band͒ in analogy with normal sleep
spindles. An enhancement corresponding to this rhythm is
seen around 21 Hz in Fig. 1.
The above arguments unify all the rhythms discussed into
a single family, with two subfamilies corresponding to waking and sleeping states. This provides a theoretical justification for dividing EEG spectra into bands, but implies that the
frequency boundaries of these bands will vary somewhat
from individual to individual, with an inverse dependence on
t 0 , weaker dependence on ␺ Ј / ␺ , and still weaker variation
with the other model parameters. Such variations between
individuals have been recognized in the literature ͓18͔.
The third column of Table II illustrates nominal assignments of frequency band designations based on an alpha frequency of 10 Hz. These correspond quite well with the conventional assignments of the delta, theta, and alpha bands.

021903-11

P. A. ROBINSON et al.

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

The traditional beta band incorporates the spindle, beta,
beta-2 spindle, and beta-2 bands of our classification scheme.
As conventionally defined, the gamma band extends undifferentiated upward from 30 Hz. In principle, our analysis
implies that it can be subdivided into sub-bands of order 5
Hz in width, which we label gamma-1, gamma-1 spindle
( ␴ ␥ 1 ), gamma-2, gamma-2 spindle ( ␴ ␥ 2 ), etc. However, in
practice, the relevant peaks are unlikely to be distinguishable
from experimental noise in this range ͑see the next subsection for details͒, so it is not unreasonable to label the entire
range the gamma band, as is conventional. In the above terminology, the theta rhythm could be labeled the alpha
spindle and denoted ␴ ␣ , but the old nomenclature is too well
established to be likely to make this renaming acceptable.
Figure 6͑a͒ shows the ratios of the pairs of spectra in Figs.
1͑a͒–1͑e͒. These ratios are remarkably similar at different
electrodes, despite the relatively large differences between
the actual spectra. In Fig. 6͑b͒ the mean of the five ratios is
plotted, bracketed by the interelectrode standard deviation.
This ratio oscillates strongly, with an amplitude that decreases rapidly with f. It has peaks at f Ϸ5, 14, 23, and 33
Hz, as listed in Table II, the last of these being relatively
indistinct. Troughs are also seen near 9.5, 19, and 26 Hz. We
argue that these peaks and troughs correspond to the theta,
spindle, beta-2 spindle, gamma-1 spindle, alpha, beta, and
beta-2 rhythms, respectively. The peak at Ͻ0.2 Hz, seen in
Fig. 1 corresponds to delta rhythm. At high frequencies, the
ratios seen in Fig. 6 approach a nearly constant plateau, as
expected from ͑37͒.
Use of ratios between waking and sleeping spectra removes skull-thickness differences between electrodes, as
well as the systematic frequency shifts associated with the
shape of the underlying smooth spectrum, and also highlights
the differences between the waking and sleeping spectra. The
ratios of the frequencies obtained from Figs. 1 and 6 to the
alpha frequency are close to integers and half-integers, as
predicted from our theory. Figure 6 thus provides evidence
of the detection of the mϭ5 ͑beta-2 spindle͒ rhythm, with
weaker evidence for the mϭ6 ͑beta-2͒, and mϭ7 ͑gamma-1
spindle͒ rhythms. In future work, these tentative detections
will be further tested using EEGs from multiple subjects with
longer acquisition times.
B. Sharpness of spectral peaks

The prominence of spectral peaks can be quantified in
terms of their Q values ͑which should not be confused with
the firing rates Q e and Q i in Sec. II͒, which are large for
strong peaks. We define an effective Q m to be the ratio of the
height of the mth peak to the trough immediately above it in
frequency. This gives
Q mϷ

Ϸ

2
͉ Im q mϩ1
r 2e ͉

͑48͒

2 2
͉ Im q m
re͉

Im͓ 2x mϩ1 ϩG ee B ͑ ␻ mϩ1 ͒ ␥ e t 0 ⌿ mϩ1 e i ␻ mϩ1 t 0 ͔
Im͓ 2x m ϩG ee B ͑ ␻ m ͒ ␥ e t 0 ⌿ m e i ␻ m t 0 ͔

.

͑49͒

Since ␻ m and ␻ mϩ1 correspond to a peak and its neighboring
trough, the imaginary parts of ⌿ m exp(i␻mt0) and
⌿ mϩ1 exp(i␻mϩ1t0) are approximately equal and opposite,
with the denominator in ͑49͒ being small for a strong peak.
Hence, if we approximate x mϩ1 by x m in the first term in the
numerator, and B( ␻ mϩ1 ) by B( ␻ m ), we find
Q mϷ

4␻m
G ee B ͑ ␻ m ͒ ␥ e ͉ Im͓͑ ⌿ m Ϫ⌿ res ͒ e i ␻ m t 0 ͔ ͉

,

͑50͒

where the exactly resonant value ⌿ res is complex and satisfies
Im͓ ⌿ rese i ␻ m t ͔ ϭ2 ␻ m / ␥ e G ee B ͑ ␻ m ͒ .

͑51͒

At large and small ␻ ͑with some deviations in between͒,
Eq. ͑50͒ implies that the mth resonance sharpens as ⌿
→⌿ m and that ͉ ⌿ ͉ must certainly exceed the modulus of the
right-hand side of ͑51͒ before resonance can occur. The behavior of B( ␻ ) given by ͑40͒ and ͑41͒ implies that high-Q
resonances are only possible for ␻ m Շ ␣ and, hence, for low
m. The rapid fall-off in Q for high m is seen in the theoretical
spectra in Figs. 3 and 4 and in the experimental ones in Figs.
1 and 6. Experimentally, it seems that only the mϭ1Ϫ4
resonances can have large Q, consistent with Fig. 6. The
rapid decrease of Q m with m underpins our comments in the
preceding section that only the peaks with small m are likely
to be discernible in experimental data. It is worth noting that,
as was seen in Fig. 6, the mϭ1 solution does not always
produce a strong discrete peak; in some cases it blends with
the 1/f spectrum with no intervening minimum. This behavior is consistent with the preceding discussion, because the
latter explicitly ignored the factor ␪ in the numerator in ͑24͒,
which cancels the sin ␪ term in the denominator at small ␪ .
This behavior can weaken the theta peak relative to what was
implied above.
C. Instabilities

The condition Sу0 is necessary, but not sufficient, for
cortical stability, since it guarantees the absence of instability
only at f ϭ0, and then only so long as A 1 does not change
sign. One possibility for instability at Sϭ0 occurs if A 1
changes sign, in which case the spectrum passes through a
1/f 3 regime, given by ͑34͒, followed by an instability that
first sets in at f ϭ0 then extends to include higher frequencies. Alternatively, it is possible for instability to set in at
nonzero frequency if a q 2 loop cuts the negative real axis.
Instability at ␻ m then sets in approximately when ͉ ⌿ ͉
ϭ ͉ ⌿ m ͉ , where the spectrum can first develop a singularity.
Since ͉ ⌿ m ͉ increases monotonically with m, the first such
instability usually sets a stability boundary for the cortical
dynamics as a whole. Assuming the simpler association between m and peaks, this boundary is thus set by the mϭ2
͑alpha͒ resonance in the waking state, and the mϭ1 ͑theta͒
resonance in sleep ͑or the mϭ3 resonance if the theta resonance is weakened, as was discussed above͒.
If an instability sets in, the system will rapidly move to a
nonlinear regime in which the linear analysis is invalid.

021903-12

PREDICTION OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC . . .

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

Hence, in the presence of instabilities, spectra computed
from equations in the preceding sections will not be correct.
If the ratio ␺ Ј / ␺ is specified, as will be the case in Sec.
VI, we can estimate the stability boundaries implied by the
above discussion. When A 1 ϭ0, ͑36͒ implies that one must
have

␺

ͫ

ͬ ͩ

ͪ

2
2
2
2
2
ϩ
ϩ ϩt Ј ϾϪ
ϩ
,
␥e ␣G0 ␣
␥e ␣G0

͑52͒

t Ј ϭt 0 ͑ 1Ϫ ␺ Ј / ␺ ͒ ,

͑53͒

which implies ␺ ϾϪ1 unless ␺ Ј / ␺ Ͼ1Ϫ2/␣ t 0 . The relationship Sϭ0 then implies a boundary in the G ee ϪG ii plane,
with the physically allowable region satisfying

ͩ ͪ

4
2
2
ϩ ϩt Ј ϪG ee ϩt Ј
␥e ␣
␣
G ii Ͻ
.
2
2
ϩ ϩt Ј
␥e ␣

͑54͒

This condition is a straight line with slope above Ϫ1 unless
the denominator in ͑54͒ is negative, which occurs for

ͩ

ͪ

␺Ј
2 1
1
Ͼ1ϩ
ϩ .
␺
t0 ␥e ␣

͑55͒

In the latter case, the condition

ͩ ͪ

4
2
2
ϩ ϩt Ј ϪG ee ϩt Ј
␥e ␣
␣
,
G ii Ͼ
2
2
ϩ ϩt Ј
␥e ␣

͑56͒

applies and the slope of the boundary line is more negative
than Ϫ1. At large ␺ Ј / ␺ , the slope of the boundary is Ϫ ͓ 1
ϩ2/( ␥ e t 0 ␺ Ј / ␺ ) ͔ .
If ͉ ␺ Ј / ␺ ͉ is large, one has ͉ ⌿ ͉ Ϸ ͉ ␺ ␻ t 0 ͉ and ␺ is forced to
be small once ␻ t 0 exceeds unity, which is the case at all
spectral peaks with mу1, except at mϭ1 if one also has
␺ Ј / ␺ ՇϪ1. The approximate condition for the absence of
nonzero-f instabilities of the mϭ1 and 2 rhythms ͑theta and
alpha͒, ͉ ⌿ ͉ Ͻ ͉ ⌿ m ͉ then yields

ͫ

1ϪG ee 1Ϫ

2

␥ et 0͉ ␺ Ј/ ␺ ͉

ͬ

ͫ

տG ii տ1ϪG ee 1ϩ

2

ͬ

.
␥ et 0͉ ␺ Ј/ ␺ ͉
͑57͒

Equation ͑57͒ defines lines with negative slopes either side
of unity in magnitude. Closer analysis of the instability condition q 2 ϭ0 implies that the left inequality is imposed by the
mϭ1 ͑theta͒ instability ͑or mϭ3 if theta is weakened, a
proviso that will be assumed implicitly henceforth͒, and the
right by the mϭ2 ͑alpha͒ instability.
If ͉ ␺ Ј / ␺ ͉ is sufficiently small, none of the resonances can
become unstable. This can be seen by noting that, for ␺ Ј
ϭ0, Eq. ͑17͒ implies that the locus of q 2 is composed of a
secular part and an oscillatory part that results from CT feed-

back and gives rise to loops superposed on the secular trend.
These loops decrease in radius as ␶ ( ␻ ) in ͑12͒ decreases in
magnitude with frequency, while at zero frequency and marginal stability the radius of the loop is just sufficient for the
locus to start at the origin. The only way an instability can
occur is for a subsequent loop to reach the origin or the
negative real axis, a possibility that is most favored if ͉ ␶ ( ␻ ) ͉
stays as large as possible—i.e., for ␣ , ␤ , ␩ 1 , and ␩ 2 as large
as possible. If we make these parameters infinite ͑the optimal
case͒, we find that the locus q 2c of the loop centers satisfies
͉ q 2c r 2e ͉ 2 ϭ

␺2
2␻2 ␻4
ϩ
ϩ 4,
͑ 1ϩ ␺ ͒ 2
␥ 2e
␥e

͑58͒

which is monotonic increasing with ␻ unless Ϫ2Ͻ ␺ ϽϪ1,
a range that is forbidden by ͑54͒, which requires ␺ ϾϪ1 for
␺ Ј / ␺ small. Hence, since the loop center moves monotonically away from the origin, and the loop radius is nonincreasing, q 2 ϭ0 cannot be attained and no instability starting at
the origin is possible in this case. Once q 2c moves into the left
half of the complex plane, the origin is no longer the closest
point on the nonpositive real axis and the possibility of an
instability arising due to intersection of q 2 with some other
point on this axis arises. However, the imaginary part of q 2c
increases monotonically in magnitude in this regime from a
value which is already too large for q 2 ϭ0 ͑and, hence,
Im q 2 ϭ0) to be attained at the point where q 2c first crosses
into the left half plane. Hence, combining these arguments,
no instability is possible for ␺ Ј ϭ0.
From the above arguments, we conclude that the physically allowable region of parameter space is bounded below
by the higher of the mϭ2 boundary obtained from ͑57͒ and
the A 1 ϭ0 boundary ͑56͒, if the latter applies in place of
͑54͒. It is bounded above by the lower of the mϭ1 boundary
from ͑57͒ and the A 1 ϭ0 boundary ͑54͒, unless ͑56͒ applies
as a lower bound and ͑54͒ is irrelevant. For small positive
␺ Ј / ␺ the A 1 ϭ0 condition sets the upper bound, but this is
supplanted by the mϭ1 boundary at larger values, particularly once ͑56͒ applies and the A 1 ϭ0 boundary becomes a
lower bound. There is no lower boundary for very small
␺ Ј / ␺ because the A 1 ϭ0 boundary is an upper bound and no
resonances can become unstable. At larger ␺ Ј / ␺ the mϭ2
lower boundary cuts in, followed by competition between
A 1 ϭ0 and mϭ2 lower bounds, which both have the same
slope at large ␺ Ј / ␺ . At small negative ␺ Ј / ␺ the A 1 ϭ0 upper
bound is again the only relevant one, with the mϭ2 lower
bound appearing at larger negative values. At large negative
␺ Ј / ␺ the mϭ1 and A 1 ϭ0 boundaries compete closely to set
the upper bound, since they have the same slopes as ␺ Ј / ␺
→ϱ.
We thus find that there are three possible routes to instability from the marginally stable state, apart from S becoming negative: ͑a͒ instability starting at f ϭ0 due to A 1 changing sign, ͑b͒ mϭ1 theta instability at f Ϸ1/2t 0 Ϸ5 Hz when
␺ is negative and ␺ Ј / ␺ is positive, or lower frequencies if
␺ Ј / ␺ is negative, and ͑c͒ mϭ2 alpha instability at f Ϸ1/t 0
Ϸ10 Hz when ␺ and ␺ Ј / ␺ are positive ͑or at around 5 Hz if
␺ is positive and ␺ Ј / ␺ is negative͒. Frequencies in the alpha

021903-13

P. A. ROBINSON et al.

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

range are seen in photic epilepsy and some stages of grand
mal seizures, initial frequencies are around 4 Hz in petit mal
seizures, and very low frequencies predominate in some
stages of grand mal ͓18͔. Hence, we speculate that some of
these seizures may represent the nonlinear stages of the instabilities considered here. However, to verify or reject this
speculation will require nonlinear simulations of our model,
which are beyond the scope of the present paper.
VI. MARGINALLY STABLE EEG SPECTRA

In this section we explore the dependence of spectral
structure and instabilities on the gain parameters of our
model and impose some restrictions on the possible locus of
an arousal sequence that carries the cortex through all the
states of arousal from sleep stage 4 to high-vigilance waking
states ͑e.g., while doing complex mental arithmetic under
time pressure͒.
Observed normal EEG and MEG spectra do not appear to
exhibit any low-f plateau, except perhaps below about 0.3
Hz ͑see Fig. 1 and ͓16͔͒. Equations ͑30͒ and ͑33͒, and the
requirement to avoid f ϭ0 instability, then restrict S to very
small, non-negative values. Hence, in this section we assume
Sϭ0 in addition to the other simplifying assumptions made
in Secs. IV and V ( ␣ ϭ ␤ ϭ ␩ 1 ϭ ␩ 2 and nϭ1). If we further
fix the values of ␣ ϭ70 sϪ1 , ␥ e ϭ110 sϪ1 , and t 0 ϭ0.07 s,
we are left with only k 0 and the gain parameters G ii , G ee ,
␺ , and ␺ Ј . The characteristic wave number k 0 can be ignored here since it does not affect the stability of the cortex.
Of the remaining four parameters, ␺ can be eliminated via
͑28͒ for Sϭ0. Physiologically, one requires G ee Ͼ0 and
G ii Ͻ0, which restricts attention to a quarter of the G ee – G ii
plane for fixed ␺ Ј / ␺ . We choose the latter ratio as the third
free parameter, rather than ␺ Ј itself, since it measures the
relative strengths of direct and differential feedbacks.
Figure 7 shows the regions in the G ee – G ii plane in which
the model spectrum ͑21͒ is marginally stable ͑white zones͒
or unstable at some frequencies ͑gray zones͒ for ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭ0,
Ϯ1,Ϯ5; only the white regions represent physically allowable steady states. The locus of ␺ ϭ0 is shown dotted in each
frame and solid contours of the lowest unstable frequency
are overplotted in the gray zones.
In Fig. 7͑a͒, ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭ0 and we see that there is a single
zone of instability at upper right, bounded by the A 1 ϭ0
locus ͑54͒. As expected, the instability onset frequency near
this boundary is zero. The physically allowable region has no
lower bound, consistent with the arguments in Sec. V that no
resonant instabilities are possible in this case. Figure 8 displays a sequence of spectra and q 2 loci as the upper instability boundary is crossed, showing the development of a widening f Ϫ3 regime below about 5 Hz, followed by onset of
instability at f ϭ0 initially, then moving to higher f, with f
Ϸ0.8 Hz in column ͑c͒. In the unstable regime the corresponding q 2 locus loops first up from the origin, then down
across the negative real axis very close to the origin. At the
boundary, this crossing occurs at the origin.
In Fig. 7͑b͒, ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭ1 and the stable zone is now bounded
above and below by the mϭ1 and mϭ2 instability boundaries, respectively, from ͑57͒. The crossover between the

FIG. 7. Zones of instability ͑gray͒ in the G ee – G ii plane for S
ϭ0, ␥ e ϭ110 sϪ1 , ␣ ϭ ␤ ϭ ␩ 1 ϭ ␩ 2 ϭ70 sϪ1 , nϭ1, and t 0
ϭ0.07 s. The dotted line marks ␺ ϭ0, while the contours within
the gray areas show the minimum unstable frequency in Hz. The
irregular appearance of the zone boundaries is due to the finite
resolution of the array used in plotting. ͑a͒ ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭ0, ͑b͒ ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭ1,
͑c͒ ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭ5, ͑d͒ ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭϪ1, ͑e͒ ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭϪ5.

A 1 ϭ0 and mϭ1 conditions determining the upper bound
occurs around ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭ0.6 for the parameters considered here.
The estimate ͑57͒ is only approximately correct here because
␺ Ј / ␺ is relatively small. Figure 9 displays a sequence of
spectra and q 2 loci as the upper instability boundary is
crossed, showing that there is no f Ϫ3 regime in this case;
rather the theta peak at around 3.5 Hz sharpens until theta
instability sets in. This is reflected in the q 2 locus crossing,
then recrossing, the negative real axis in the unstable regime.
In this case, the first crossing is near, but not at, the origin,
even at the instability boundary. Figure 10 displays spectra
and q 2 loci as the lower instability boundary is crossed,

021903-14

PREDICTION OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC . . .

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

FIG. 8. Loci of q 2 r 2e ͑upper frames͒ and spectra ͑lower frames͒
spanning the instability boundary in Fig. 7͑a͒ at G ii ϭϪ2 and G ee
ϭ3.7,3.8,3.9 in columns ͑a͒–͑c͒, respectively. In the case of the
instability in ͑c͒ linear theory breaks down and the shape of the
spectrum is no longer reliable.

FIG. 9. Loci of q 2 r 2e ͑upper frames͒ and spectra ͑lower frames͒
spanning the upper instability boundary in Fig. 7͑b͒ at G ii ϭϪ2 and
G ee ϭ4.1,4.2,4.3 in columns ͑a͒–͑c͒, respectively. In the case of the
instability in ͑c͒ linear theory breaks down and the shape of the
spectrum is no longer reliable.

showing that the alpha peak becomes unstable in this case
once the q 2 locus loops right around the origin, crossing the
negative real axis in the process. At the instability boundary
the first crossing of the negative axis occurs at the origin.
In Fig. 7͑c͒, ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭ5. Here the stable zone is bounded
above by the mϭ1 instability boundary, which is reasonably
well estimated by ͑57͒. The lower bound is set by the A 1
ϭ0 instability, although the mϭ2 instability sets in at almost the same point.
Figure 7͑d͒ shows the case ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭϪ1, in which the
stable zone is bounded above by the A 1 ϭ0 curve, and below
by the mϭ2 instability. This situation persists in Fig. 7͑e͒, in
which ␺ Ј / ␺ ϭϪ5.
Taking Fig. 7 as a whole ͑and also the results presented in
Fig. 4͒, we note that it seems to be very difficult to achieve
the conditions required for an ␻ Ϫ2 spectrum, given by ͑35͒,
to manifest itself. This appears to be because A 2 changes
sign close to the locus of ␺ ϭ0 for physiologically realistic
parameters, leaving it with the wrong sign for ͑35͒ to apply
on the locus where A 1 ϭ0.
Figure 7 allows us to make some comments regarding
likely arousal sequences. Specifically, the appearance of a
low-frequency f Ϫ3 spectrum near the A 1 ϭ0 boundary allows us to associate proximity to this boundary with sleep.
Hence, unless ␺ Ј / ␺ is large and positive, sleep corresponds
to negative ␺ , and wakefulness to positive ␺ , with the reverse association for large positive ␺ Ј / ␺ . Since G ee and G ii
are both proportional to the mean firing rates of neurons ͓see
the discussion following ͑10͔͒, one would expect an arousal

sequence that approximately followed a line passing through
the origin in the G ee – G ii plane. The association with ␺ Ͼ0
in the waking state provides a more natural fit with this expectation, and also accords with the physiological expectation of positive feedback in the waking state. The results
presented in Fig. 7 thus support the correspondence between
m values and spectral peaks made in Sec. V A.
VII. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

In this work we have investigated the spectral properties
of a generalized version of our recent model of cortical electrical activity, including a physiologically plausible corticothalamic loop with both direct and differential feedbacks,
and exploring the effects of volume conduction in tissues
overlying the cortex. Differential feedback is included to allow for the possibility that temporal variations are
emphasized—likely, since almost all sensory inputs to the
cortex first pass through the thalamus, which plays a key role
in determining the attentional state of the brain. Unlike many
previous models, our model does not presuppose the existence of thalamic pacemakers or ‘‘clocks’’ to regulate the
periods of the alpha and beta rhythms. Instead, these emerge
directly from the delays in the feedback loop.
One of the main results of this work is the formula ͑21͒
for the EEG spectrum that arises from white-noise subcortical inputs, in accord with previous work ͓7,41͔, allowing for
volume conduction effects. Volume conduction is found to
affect the spectrum significantly only above about 25 Hz,

021903-15

P. A. ROBINSON et al.

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

FIG. 10. Loci of q 2 r 2e ͑upper frames͒ and spectra ͑lower frames͒
spanning the lower instability boundary in Fig. 7͑b͒ at G ii ϭϪ2 and
G ee ϭ1.3,1.4,1.5 in columns ͑a͒–͑c͒, respectively. In the case of the
instability in ͑a͒ linear theory breaks down and the shape of the
spectrum is no longer reliable.

and contributes at most an extra factor of f Ϫ3 relative to the
unfiltered spectrum.
EEG spectra are comprised of a series of peaks superposed on smooth underlying continuum. Equation ͑21͒ accounts for the major features of the underlying continuum
observed in EEG and MEG experiments, with a low-f 1/f or
f Ϫ3 component occurring near marginal stability, and a
steepening of the spectrum to f Ϫ5 ( f Ϫ8 with filtering via
volume conduction above about 25 Hz͒ at frequencies above
␣ , the characteristic dendritic rate constant, where dendritic
filtering becomes strong. The observed knee in the spectrum
occurs at around 20 Hz, consistent with ␣ Ϸ120 sϪ1 , which
is in turn consistent with independent physiological estimates
listed in Table I.
Exploration of the parameter sensitivities of the model
was carried out in Sec. IV, resulting in the development of a
simplified model with fewer parameters than the initial one.
This simplified version was used to analyze the frequencies,
sharpness, stability, and mutual correlations of spectral peaks
predicted by the model. The main results were that each peak
can be denoted by a unique ‘‘harmonic’’ number m, with the
zeroth peak corresponding to the 1/f or 1/f 3 spectrum, m
ϭ1 to theta, mϭ2 to alpha, mϭ3 to sleep spindles, and m
ϭ4 to beta. The mϭ2,4, . . . peaks are predicted to be positively correlated with one another and prominent in waking.
Likewise, the mϭ1,3,5, . . . peaks should be positively correlated and prominent in sleep, whereas these two sets are
anticorrelated overall and the mϭ0 peak is always present,
but stronger in sleep. Comparison with published observa-

tions confirms the predicted correlations, anticorrelations,
and states in which certain peaks are expected to be most
prominent. The theory is also consistent with the data shown
in Figs. 1 and 6, whence we tentatively identify new peaks
corresponding to mϭ5 ͑beta-2 spindle͒, mϭ6 ͑beta-2͒, and
mϭ7 ͑gamma-1 spindle͒ rhythms. The inferred corticothalamic feedback delay t 0 Ϸ1/f ␣ Ϸ100 ms is also consistent
with physiological constraints on this quantity. We conclude
that the simplest association between state of arousal and our
parameters is for ␺ and ␺ Ј to be positive in waking and
negative in sleep, although we cannot yet categorically rule
out certain alternatives discussed in Secs. V A and VI.
Our analysis of the spectral peaks leads to the unification
of all the major large-scale brain rhythms, and the prediction
and tentative confirmation of two new ones. It also provides
a theoretical basis for the customary subdivision of the spectrum into bands, but implies that the frequencies of these
bands are not universal, but are tied to the alpha frequency of
the individual subject, contrary to some conventions, but
consistent with the recognition of such variations in the literature ͓18͔.
Analysis of the sharpness and stability of the spectral
peaks showed that only the first few can have high Q, and
that stability of the mϭ1 ͑or mϭ3) and mϭ2 rhythms can
impose bounds on the physically allowable states of the cortex, corresponding to instabilities near 5 Hz ͑or 15 Hz͒ and
10 Hz, respectively. Together with the A 1 Ͼ0 condition required to avoid instability at f ϭ0, these conditions restrict
the range of physically allowable states in parameter space.
We speculate that these instabilities may be associated with
the linear stages of certain generalized seizures, possibly including grand mal, petit mal, and photic epilepsies. Significantly, an f Ϫ3 regime is predicted at low f close to the A 1
ϭ0 boundary in sleep. This is consistent with the observed
steepening and enhancement of the low-f spectrum in sleep.
The above results indicate that our model provides a
promising semiquantitative theoretical explanation for EEG
spectra. Most significantly, we explain the entire spectrum in
a unified way, a major advance on previous analyses, which
have generally concentrated on a single frequency band at a
time. In a forthcoming paper we will compare it in detail
with observations of multiple subjects in various states of
arousal to determine whether it is quantitatively consistent
and, in particular, whether the parameters inferred are consistent with those inferred from independent physiological
measurements. We hope that these physiological links will
prompt experimental physiologists to determine tighter constraints on some of the less well known parameter values.
Our model differs from some in the literature in that,
rather than adding numerous parameters to describe ever
finer details, it restricts attention to a set of physiologically
realistic mechanisms that appear to be sufficient to capture
the overall behavior of the EEG, and parametrizes these as
simply as possible. This keeps the number of parameters low
and their physical significance clear.
One limitation of the present work is that it does not attempt to describe spatial variations of the spectrum, although
these are significant in practice ͑albeit less so when spectral
ratios, such as those in Fig. 6 are considered͒. This is not a

021903-16

PREDICTION OF ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHIC . . .

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

fundamental limitation, as the model can be easily generalized to include such variations if next-order accuracy is required, but at the price of introducing additional parameters.
A second limitation is that, although the cortex appears to
operate near marginal stability, we have not as yet identified
a mechanism to keep it at this point. This does not affect the
present discussion, but is an important point of principle.
Third, although we argue that corticothalamic feedback is the
most important one in determining the observed spectral
rhythms, we do not exclude the possibility that other feedback loops with similar time delays may also contribute.

jaw muscles, this class of artifact could be suppressed to the
point that the high-frequency spectrum was not significantly
affected. Cardiac interference at low frequencies was also
found to be minimal, with no spectral peak detected at the
heartbeat frequency of around 1 Hz, or its harmonics.
The waking spectra in Fig. 1 were for a normal female
subject, aged 30, in a relaxed, eyes-closed state, while the
sleep spectrum was for the same subject in sleep stage 2.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

In this appendix we show that the high frequency effects
of filtering are nearly the same for any physically reasonable
filter function.
If we assume that F(k) only depends on the magnitude of
the wave vector, and falls off rapidly for kϾk 0 , the integral
in ͑20͒ can be written in the form

The authors thank K. E. Crowley and I. Colrain for scoring the sleep spectra in Fig. 1.
This work was supported by the Australian Research
Council, the National Health and Medical Research Council,
and the Ross Trust, Melbourne.

APPENDIX B: GENERAL EFFECTS OF FILTERING
BY OVERLYING STRUCTURES

APPENDIX A: BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE
EXPERIMENT USED TO OBTAIN FIG. 1

Iϭ ␲

In this appendix we briefly outline the experiment used to
obtain the data used in Fig. 1, justifying the accuracy of the
overall form of the spectrum and the reality of the spectral
peaks seen. A fuller description is found in Ref. ͓6͔ and more
details will be published in a forthcoming work in which a
large set of EEG spectra from multiple subjects will be analyzed in detail.
The data in Fig. 1 were obtained from the Cz, Pz, Fz, C3,
and C4 electrodes in the International 10–20 system, with
linked ears providing the reference potential. The Cz electrode is located at the crown ͑or vertex͒ of the head, furthest
from the reference electrodes and from muscle groups that
could generate electrical interference. The Fz and Pz electrodes are located roughly 6 cm in front of and behind this
electrode, respectively, while the C3 and C4 electrodes are
situated symmetrically Ϸ6 cm either side of it. The data
were low-pass filtered to remove frequencies above 50 Hz
and sampled at 250 Hz for periods of 2 minutes in waking
and 13 minutes in sleep. The spectra were then calculated by
Fourier transforming 8 second segments of these data and
averaging these transforms.
Narrow band artifacts at the mains frequency of 50 Hz
and its subharmonic of 25 Hz were identified due to their
presence even in the absence of a subject. As each affected
only a single spectral channel, they were simply removed by
deleting these channels before plotting the spectra. Ocular
artifacts due to eye blinks and pendular eye movements were
removed by standard algorithms ͓46͔. When present, muscular artifacts due to jaw, neck, and other movements, were
found to contaminate the high-frequency spectrum with
noise having an approximately 1/f spectrum which is easily
identified. Trials with a subset of subjects showed that, with
appropriate instructions to minimize movement and relax

͵

ϱ

dk

2

0

F ͑ k 2 /k 20 ͒
͉ k 2 ϩq 2 ͉ 2

͑B1͒

.

Upon changing variables to uϭk 2 /k 20 , we find

Iϭ

ϳ

␲
2i Im q 2

͵

ϱ

0

du F ͑ u ͒

␲

k 20 Im q 2

Im q 2

͉ q 4͉

ͫ

1
uϩq

2

Ϫ
/k 20

1
uϩq * 2 /k 20

ͬ

͑B2͒
͑B3͒

,

where ͑B2͒ has been expanded in powers of k 20 /q 2 u and we
have used the fact that F falls off rapidly for kϾk 0 . This
result is of the same form as the more specialized one, Eq.
͑26͒, and shows that the asymptotic ␻ Ϫ3 filtering does not
depend strongly on the structure of the filter function.
APPENDIX C: EXPLICIT EXPRESSIONS FOR A 0 AND A 1

In this appendix we give explicit expressions for the coefficients A 0 and A 1 in the expansion ͑32͒ for ␣ ϭ ␤ . Expressions for higher A j are complicated and their exact analytic
form is likely to be more strongly model dependent, so we
do not reproduce them here.
Direct expansion of ͑17͒ yields
A 0 ϭS,
A 1ϭ

ͫ

ͩ

ͪ

ͬ

2
G ee 2 ͑ 1ϩ ␺ ͒
n
n
ϩ
ϩ t 0ϩ ϩ
␺ Ϫt 0 ␺ Ј ,
␥e G0
␣G0
␩1 ␩2
͑C2͒

with S given by ͑28͒ and G 0 given by ͑31͒.

021903-17

͑C1͒

P. A. ROBINSON et al.

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 63 021903

͓1͔ M.R. Rosenzweig and A.L. Leiman, Physiological Psychology
͑Random House, New York, 1989͒.
͓2͔ M.P. Stryker, Nature ͑London͒ 338, 297 ͑1989͒.
͓3͔ W. Singer and C.M. Gray, Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 555
͑1995͒.
͓4͔ R. Caton, Br. Med. J. 1, 278 ͑1875͒.
͓5͔ H. Berger, Arch. Psychol. Nervenkr. 87, 527 ͑1929͒.
͓6͔ A.R. Haig, E. Gordon, G. Rogers, and J. Anderson, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 94, 288 ͑1995͒.
͓7͔ F.H. Lopes da Silva, A. Hoeks, A. Smits, and L.H. Zetterberg,
Kybernetik 15, 27 ͑1974͒.
͓8͔ D.L. Robinson, Int. J. Neurosci. 22, 81 ͑1983͒.
͓9͔ G. Buzsa´ki, Neuroscience ͑Oxford͒ 41, 351 ͑1991͒.
͓10͔ P.L. Nunez, in Neocortical Dynamics and Human EEG
Rhythms, edited by P.L. Nunez ͑Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1995͒, Chaps. 1 and 9.
͓11͔ F.H. Lopes da Silva, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol.
79, 81 ͑1991͒.
͓12͔ A.M.L. Coenen, Neurosci. Biobehav Rev. 19, 447 ͑1995͒.
͓13͔ F.H. Lopes da Silva, J.E. Vos, J. Mooibroek, and A. van Rotterdam, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 50, 449
͑1980͒.
͓14͔ M. Steriade, P. Gloor, R.R. Llina´s, F.H. Lopes da Silva, and
M.-M. Mesulam, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 76,
481 ͑1990͒.
͓15͔ W.J. Freeman, in Induced Rhythms of the Brain, edited by E.
Bas¸ar and T.H. Bullock ͑Birkha¨user, Basel, 1991͒.
͓16͔ E. Novikov, A. Novikov, D. Shannahoff-Khalsa, B. Schwartz,
and J. Wright, Phys. Rev. E 56, R2387 ͑1997͒.
͓17͔ G. Dumermuth, B. Lange, D. Lehmann, C.A. Meier, R. Dinkelmann, and L. Molinari, Eur. Neurol. 22, 322 ͑1983͒.
͓18͔ E. Niedermeyer, in Electroencephalography: Basic Principles,
Clinical Applications, and Related Fields, 4th ed., edited by E.
Niedermeyer and F.H. Lopes da Silva ͑Williams and Wilkins,
Baltimore, 1999͒, Chaps. 9, 13, and 27.
͓19͔ H.R. Wilson and J.D. Cowan, Kybernetik 13, 55 ͑1973͒.
͓20͔ P.L. Nunez, Electric Fields of the Brain ͑Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 1981͒.
͓21͔ P.A. Robinson, C.J. Rennie, and J.J. Wright, Phys. Rev. E 56,
826 ͑1997͒.
͓22͔ P.A. Robinson, J.J. Wright, and C.J. Rennie, Phys. Rev. E 57,
4578 ͑1998͒.
͓23͔ C.J. Rennie, P.A. Robinson, and J.J. Wright, Phys. Rev. E 59,
3320 ͑1999͒.

͓24͔ C.J. Rennie, J.J. Wright, and P.A. Robinson, J. Theor. Biol.
205, 17 ͑2000͒.
͓25͔ A. van Rotterdam, F.H. Lopes da Silva, J. van den Ende, M.A.
Viergever, and A.J. Hermans, Bull. Math. Biol. 44, 283
͑1982͒.
͓26͔ W.J. Freeman, Mass Action in the Nervous System ͑Academic,
New York, 1975͒.
͓27͔ P.L. Nunez, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 21, 473 ͑1974͒.
͓28͔ J.J. Wright and D.T.J. Liley, Network Comput. Neural Syst. 5,
191 ͑1994͒.
͓29͔ J.J. Wright, Biol. Cybern. 81, 131 ͑1999͒.
͓30͔ J.J. Wright and D.T.J. Liley, Behav. Brain Sci. 19, 285 ͑1996͒.
͓31͔ V.K. Jirsa and H. Haken, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 960 ͑1996͒.
͓32͔ V.K. Jirsa and H. Haken, Physica D 99, 503 ͑1997͒.
͓33͔ P.A. Robinson, C.J. Rennie, J.J. Wright, and P.D. Bourke,
Phys. Rev. E 58, 3557 ͑1998͒.
͓34͔ D.T.J. Liley and J.J. Wright, Network 5, 175 ͑1994͒.
͓35͔ G.H. Bishop, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 4, 305
͑1936͒.
͓36͔ E.R. Kandel, J.H. Schwartz, and T.M. Jessell, Principles of
Neural Science ͑Appleton and Lange, Norwalk, Connecticut,
1991͒.
͓37͔ V. Braitenberg and A. Shu¨z, Anatomy of the Cortex: Statistics
and Geometry ͑Springer, Berlin, 1991͒.
͓38͔ R. Douglas and K. Martin, in The Synaptic Organization of the
Brain, edited by G. Shepherd ͑Oxford, New York, 1998͒, p.
459.
͓39͔ S.M. Sherman and C. Koch, in The Synaptic Organization of
the Brain, edited by G. Shepherd ͑Oxford, New York, 1998͒,
p. 289.
͓40͔ R. Srinivasan, P.L. Nunez, and R.B. Silberstein, IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 45, 814 ͑1998͒.
͓41͔ C.J. Stam, J.P.M. Pijn, P. Suffczynski, and F.H. Lopes da
Silva, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 110, 1801
͑1999͒.
͓42͔ M. Abramowitz and I.A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical
Functions ͑Dover, New York, 1970͒.
͓43͔ J.A. Gray, Neural Networks 10, 1257 ͑1997͒.
͓44͔ C.L. Lim, R.J. Barry, E. Gordon, A. Sawant, C.J. Rennie, and
C. Yiannikas, Int. J. Psychophysiol. 21, 151 ͑1996͒.
͓45͔ W. Klimesch, Brain Res. Rev. 29, 169 ͑1999͒.
͓46͔ G. Gratton, M.G. Coles, and E. Donchin, Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 55, 468 ͑1983͒.

021903-18

