DISORDERS OF CONSCIOUSNESS

Synchrony in the Interconnected Circuitry
of the Thalamus and Cerebral Cortex
Edward G. Jones
Center for Neuroscience, University of California, Davis, California 95616, USA
The corticothalamic system is organized to play a key role in synchronizing the activities of thalamic and cortical neurons. Its synapses dominate the inputs to relay cells
and to the GABAergic cells of the reticular nucleus; its organization in focused and
diffuse projections promotes both coherent activity of relay neurons and the spread
of activity across the cortex and thalamus. The capacity of relay neurons to operate
in voltage-dependent tonic or burst mode permits corticothalamic inputs to directly
excite the relay cells or indirectly inhibit them via the reticular nucleus. This enables
the corticothalamic projection to synchronize high- or low-frequency oscillatory activity, respectively, in the thalamo–corticothalamic network. Differences in the subunit
composition of AMPA receptors at synapses formed by branches of the same corticothalamic axon in the reticular nucleus and dorsal thalamus are an important element
in the capacity of the cortex to synchronize low-frequency oscillations in the network.
Intrinsic voltage-gated calcium channels of different kinds expressed in the relay neurons form a substrate for corticothalamic interactions with the relay cells that promote
high- or low-frequency oscillations. Focused corticothalamic axons arising from layer
VI cortical cells and diffuse corticothalamic axons arising from layer V cortical cells,
in conjunction with the core and matrix cells of the dorsal thalamus, form a substrate
for synchronization of widespread populations of cortical and thalamic cells during
high-frequency oscillations that underlie discrete conscious events.
Key words: thalamus; thalamocortical; corticothalamic connections; core and matrix
cells; oscillations; electroencephalogram; intrinsic properties

Introduction: Types
of Thalamic Nuclei
It was once thought that only the principal
sensory nuclei of the thalamus received subcortical input and projected to the cerebral cortex; others, such as the ventral anterior and intralaminar nuclei, were thought not to project
to the cortex. It is now known that every nucleus in the dorsal thalamus receives some kind
of subcortical input and projects to the cerebral cortex. The thalamus also has substantial
projections, unknown to earlier investigators, to
the striatum, amygdala, and certain other basal

Address for correspondence: Dr. Edward G. Jones, Center for Neuroscience, 544 Newton Court, Davis, CA 95616. Voice: 530-757-8747; fax:
530-754-9136. ejones@ucdavis.edu

telencephalic centers. We can now divide the
dorsal thalamic nuclei into those that project
to the cerebral cortex and those (primarily the
intralaminar nuclei) that project to the cortex
and striatum. However, those projecting to the
cortex do so in different ways. The classical,
topographically organized projection arising in
the sensory relay nuclei (the lateral geniculate,
medial geniculate, and ventral posterior nuclei)
and focused on layer IV of a single cortical
area (or at most a pair of areas) is the least
common. Many other thalamic nuclei project
upon several cortical areas and often do so in
a rather diffuse manner, the fiber terminations
commonly ending in one or more of several
layers other than layer IV. Cortical layers I and
VI are the most common that receive diffuse
inputs but no layer is exempt from a thalamic input: it depends on the area of cortex in

Disorders of Consciousness: Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1157: 10–23 (2009).
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04534.x C 2009 Association for Research in Nervous and Mental Disease.

10

Jones: Thalamocortical Synchrony

11

which the layer is situated and on the thalamic nucleus or nuclei projecting to it (reviewed
by Jones [2007]1 ). Further complexity has been
added by the accumulating evidence that many
nuclei of the dorsal thalamus can contain two
or more populations of cells, one projecting in a
focused manner upon a single cortical area and
others projecting diffusely upon several areas,
often with terminations in different layers of the
cortex. In this lies a key to understanding how
the thalamus is able to play a key role in effecting synchrony of the interconnected thalamo–
corticothalamic network and probably of the
cortico–basal ganglia–thalamocortical network
as well.
The Core and Matrix of Thalamic
Organization
Information that has come from the identification of thalamic relay cells in primates and
certain other species in terms of expression of
three common calcium-binding proteins, parvalbumin, 28-kDa calbindin, and 29-kDa calretinin, has resulted in a new view of the dorsal
thalamus and its cortical projection in primates
in terms of a core and matrix pattern (Fig. 1). In
this scheme2,3 ) (see also several reviews by the
author1,4,5 ), a diffuse matrix of calbindin cells
is found throughout all dorsal thalamic nuclei,
while upon the matrix, in some nuclei only,
particularly the major sensory and motor relay
nuclei, a core of parvalbumin cells is imposed.
Although the biochemical or metabolic significance of this differential expression of calciumbinding proteins is unknown, this differential
expression is associated with distinct patterns
of projection of the two classes of relay cells:
the parvalbumin cells are innervated by the
major subcortical sensory and motor pathways
and project with a high degree of topographic
order on a single cortical area, the axons terminating in middle layers of the cortex (IV and
deep III); the calbindin cells of the matrix customarily receive subcortical inputs from lesswell-defined subcortical pathways and project

Figure 1. A frontal section through the middle
of a macaque monkey thalamus (lower part of the
illustration), with the relative distributions and concentrations of calbindin matrix cells (left) and parvalbumin core cells (right) plotted. Densities of dots
represent the relative density of each cell type. The
upper part of the figure shows schematically the projection of the matrix to superficial layers of the cerebral cortex over a relatively wide extent. Core cells
restricted to individual nuclei, here exemplified by the
ventral posterior nucleus, project in a topographically
ordered manner to middle layers of single cortical
fields. (From Jones [2007]1 .)

more diffusely upon the cortex, their projection unconstrained by architectonic or functional borders between cortical areas and their
axons terminating in superficial layers (I, II,
and upper III) (Fig. 1). In the three great sensory relay nuclei, the parvalbumin-rich domain
is the target of the medial lemniscus, P and
M ganglion cells, and central nucleus of the
inferior colliculus, while the calbindin matrix
is the target of the spinothalamic system, of
the blue-on ganglion cell system, and the less
specific auditory pathways arising in the brain
stem and reaching the medial geniculate nucleus via the lateral tegumental system of fibers
(Fig. 2). Similar parallelism may hold in the
motor relay nuclei and in some of the nuclei
of the pulvinar. In nuclei and in parts of nuclei
from which the parvalbumin core is lacking,

12

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences

Figure 2. Schematic views of the diffuse and specific subcortical inputs that terminate in the matrix and
core compartments of the ventral posterior (A), medial geniculate (B), and dorsal lateral geniculate (C) nuclei
of macaque monkeys and the layer-specific and diffuse or focused projections of these compartments to the
cerebral cortex. In panels A and C, cortical areas are indicated by schematic vertical sections, with the layers
indicated; panel B shows the surface of the supratemporal plane, with the different auditory fields delineated.
(Based on Jones [2001]5 .)

there is commonly an enhancement of the
calbindin population of cells and there is a
denser calbindin projection. The intralaminar
nuclei are not a homogeneous single entity but
contain zones enriched with either calbindinor parvalbumin-immunoreactive cells. At the
cortical level, the parallel inputs via the projections of the calbindin- and parvalbuminexpressing relay cells can predominantly target different areas of the sensory cortex, with
the parvalbumin-expressing cells of the medial geniculate nucleus, for example, targeting
the primary areas and the calbindin-expressing
cells of the matrix targeting mainly the surrounding belt areas. Of greater import, however, are the terminations of the two sets of
afferents ending at different laminar levels in
the cortex, for this should set up a coincidencedetecting circuit that is important for ensuring
thalamocortical synchrony.

Fundamental Thalamic Circuitry
Thalamic relay neurons in all nuclei of all
species display a symmetrical, bushy dendritic
field that was originally described by K¨olliker

in the 1890s. This characteristic is only significantly modified in the X-cells in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat, the dendritic
fields of which are more elongated and the dendrites of which possess a far greater proportion
of dendritic protrusions.
Relay cells share a common synaptic geography.6–8 Cells in the ventral posterior
nucleus and in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat receive approximately
5000–8000 synapses over their whole soma–
dendritic membrane. Approximately 44% of
these synapses are derived from corticothalamic fibers and are concentrated on secondary
and tertiary dendrites. Approximately 16%
are derived from medial lemniscal or optic
tract fibers and are concentrated on proximal dendrites, the terminals making multiple
points of synaptic contact on dendritic protrusions as well as on the shafts of the dendrites.
The remaining 40% of synapses are inhibitory
and tend to be concentrated on proximal and
secondary dendrites and on the soma, and the
majority are derived from axons of the reticular nucleus.9 A small number of inhibitory
synapses (∼5% of the total) are derived from
presynaptic dendrites of intrinsic interneurons.

Jones: Thalamocortical Synchrony

Figure 3. Schematic showing the basic circuitry
of the thalamus, which is made up of connections
between afferent fibers (Aff), thalamocortical relay
cells (TCR), intrinsic interneurons (IN), reticular nucleus cells (R), and the cerebral cortex. (From Jones
[2007]1 .)

The GABAergic cells of the thalamic reticular nucleus occupy a central place in thalamic circuitry. They are innervated by collateral
branches of thalamocortical and corticothalamic fibers as these traverse a sector of the nucleus defined by its connectivity with a particular dorsal thalamic nucleus and its associated
cortical area. This bidirectional collateral input to the reticular nucleus and the projection
of the reticular nucleus cells in that sector back
to the particular dorsal thalamic nucleus form
the basis of the fundamental circuit diagram of
the thalamus (Fig. 3). Inputs coming to a nucleus of the dorsal thalamus from the periphery
or from intrinsic brain structures excite relay
neurons, and the collaterals of these neurons’

13

cortically projecting axons excite reticular nucleus cells which, in projecting back to the same
nucleus, form an inhibitory feedback connection to the relay cells. Fibers returning to the
thalamus from the cortical area to which the
dorsal thalamus projects excite, via their collaterals, cells in the same sector of the reticular
nucleus, and in this case the projection of the
reticular nucleus cells into the dorsal thalamus
provides an inhibitory feed-forward to the relay cells. This bidirectional circuitry holds the
key to understanding many aspects of thalamic
function. The inputs from the reticular nucleus
are the only inhibitory inputs to thalamic relay
cells in most nuclei of rodents and some other
species in which intrinsic interneurons are absent; they outnumber by far the inhibitory dendrodendritic synapses of intrinsic neurons in
species in which intrinsic inhibitory neurons are
present.
Corticothalamic terminals also predominate
on reticular nucleus cells, accounting for nearly
70% of the synapses that these cells receive.10
The small terminals of the corticothalamic collaterals have a single small postsynaptic density
that appears to reflect the presence of a single
vesicle release site, and they are distributed in
more or less equal numbers over both proximal and distal dendrites of a reticular nucleus
cell. The less frequent synapses derived from
collaterals of thalamocortical fibers are mainly
located on the proximal dendrites of the reticular nucleus cells and, although in the minority,
are distinguished by a larger size and by the
presence of large, perforated postsynaptic densities indicative of multiple vesicle release sites
(Fig. 4). These differences are reflected in the
variability, amplitudes, and rise times of unitary excitatory postsynaptic currents induced
in these cells by stimulation of the two sets of
collaterals.11,12 GABAergic synapses between
reticular nucleus cells, formed by intrareticular
collaterals of reticular nucleus cells or by dendrodendritic synapses, are also key features of
the circuitry and play a major role in setting
up the synchronous action of reticular nucleus
cells.

14

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences

Figure 4. (A) A mouse thalamocortical slice preparation, showing the location of a recording electrode
(rec.) in the thalamic reticular nucleus (Rtn) and a stimulating electrode (stim.) in layer VI of the somatosensory
cortex (Ctx). Latencies of synaptic responses of neurons in the reticular nucleus following stimulation of layer
VI are shown in the graph. The shorter latency responses at 2–4 ms stem from antidromic activation of thalamocortical axons (TC) and invasion of their collaterals in the reticular nucleus. The longer latency responses
at 6–10 ms stem from orthodromic activation of corticothalamic fiber collaterals (CT). The lower panels show
overlays of 10 voltage clamp traces from a reticular nucleus neuron following minimal stimulation of TC and
CT fibers, and averages of the 10 traces are shown beneath each overlay. Minimal thalamocortical excitatory
postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) are of greater amplitude, have faster rise and decay times, and exhibit fewer
failures than minimal corticothalamic EPSCs. (B) Data obtained from the same preparation as shown in
panel A, including the following: overlay of 10 voltage clamp traces from a neuron in the ventral posterior
nucleus (VP) and from one in the reticular nucleus (R) following minimal stimulation of corticothalamic fibers;
their average response; trial–to–trial variability in peak amplitudes of EPSC successes, indicating that minimal EPSC amplitudes are larger in the reticular nucleus neuron; the narrow distribution of amplitudes of EPSC

Jones: Thalamocortical Synchrony

Two Modes of Action of Thalamic
Neurons
Relay cells possess not only a common set of
membrane properties but also share a common
morphology and a common synaptic circuitry
in which the nonspecific brain stem afferent
systems, especially the cholinergic, tilt them towards either burst or tonic mode in order to
make the transfer of afferent information either
less or more effective and in which the reticular
nucleus and corticothalamic inputs serve to create functional assemblies that oscillate in tune
with our states of consciousness. The complexity lies not in the circuitry but in the functional
states that it subserves.
A thalamocortical relay neuron is a more efficient transmitter of sensory information to the
cortex in an awake than in a drowsy animal.13
Seminal studies by Llin´as and colleagues14–16
in vitro and by Steriade and colleagues17,18 in vivo
revolutionized study of the thalamus by revealing that all thalamic neurons have the capacity to switch their firing behavior between two
states depending on their membrane potential.
At membrane potentials negative to minus 60
mV, the cells exhibit bursting behavior when
subjected to a brief depolarizing current injection or when stimulated directly, antidromically,
or by means of afferent synapses. After activation, there is a refractory period of 150–180 ms.
At membrane potentials positive to minus 55
mV, thalamic cells, when stimulated as above,
fire the repetitive fast spikes typical of thalamocortical relay cells in the awake state. The
bistable membrane state of thalamic relay cells

15

is another clue to understanding the synchrony
in forebrain networks that underlies consciousness and unconscious states.
When relatively depolarized under the drive
of the arousal systems of the brain stem and
with the influence of the reticular nucleus at
its least effective, cortically projecting neurons
of the thalamus are capable of relaying activity
from the peripheral sense organs with little or
no degradation of temporal or spatial information or of sensory quality. This is what makes
the thalamus such an efficient relay for sensory
information from the periphery to the centers
for perception in the cerebral cortex.
There is a dramatic contrast between the
tonic activity of relay neurons in the awake, attentive state and the activity of these neurons
during drowsy inattentiveness and sleep, when
the brain stem drive is weakened, the neurons
are hyperpolarized, and the influence of the
reticular nucleus is at its peak. In this state,
high-frequency bursts of action potentials are
discharged at a slow rhythm that is communicated to the electroencephalogram (EEG) as
high-amplitude slow waves of spindle and delta
frequencies.
The possession of two different modes of
action potential generation and the capacity
to switch from the tonic, relay mode to burst
mode, in which thalamic projection neurons
are less effective transmitters of information
whether centrally or peripherally generated,
makes the thalamus a key structure in virtually every aspect of forebrain function. In the
tonic mode, when under the influence of the
nonspecific brain stem afferents, relay cells are

←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
successes in the ventral posterior neuron and the wider range in the reticular nucleus neuron. (C) Serial
electron micrographs of single corticothalamic synapses in the ventral posterior and reticular nuclei stained
by the immunogold technique for GluR4 glutamate receptor subunits, showing the small number of gold
particles at the synapse in the ventral posterior (VP) nucleus (A–C) and the larger number at the synapse in
the reticular nucleus (RTN) (D–F). (D) Comparison of the number of GluR4 and GluR2/3 immunogold particles
found at two serially sectioned corticothalamic synapses in the RTN and VP nucleus. GluR4 subunits at the
corticothalamic synapses in the reticular nucleus clearly outnumber those at the corticothalamic synapses
in the ventral posterior nucleus, but the number of GluR2/3 subunits is approximately equal. (From Jones
[2007]1 .)

16

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences

relatively depolarized and firing trains of single
action potentials and the thalamus is capable
of operating as the simplest of relays, conveying sensory information to the cerebral cortex
with little or no decrement in spatial or temporal properties. Under these conditions the
influence of the reticular nucleus is at its least,
serving only to sharpen the contrast between
signal and noise, and corticothalamic feedback
is influential in assembling relay neurons into
ensembles that fire coherently at ∼40 Hz. It is
in the tonic state of relay cell function that the
properties of relay cells that most befit them for
a role as conduits in the pathways to perception are most clearly revealed. The outputs of
the cells then become faithful facsimiles of the
inputs, with the capacity to follow a repeated
peripheral stimulus only failing at high repetition rates. The further grouping of relay neurons into assemblies discharging synchronously
at ∼40 Hz and leading to an act of perception
also appears to be a key element in the effective
transfer of information to cortical neurons that
can be brought into action under the influence
of remarkably few thalamocortical synapses.
State-Dependent Activity of
Thalamocortical Relay Cells
The two modes of spike generation, dependent on the inactivation or deinactivation of the
voltage-dependent T-channel, have their functional expression in the two modes of relay cell
behavior during arousal and sleep (reviewed
by McCormick and Bal [1997]19 and Steriade
[2003]20 ). During wakefulness, directed attention, and higher cognitive performance, relay
neurons, under the influence of the nonspecific brain stem systems, primarily the cholinergic, are relatively depolarized and fire tonically in response to peripherally or centrally
generated afferent activity. By contrast, during
drowsy inattentiveness and slow wave sleep, the
neurons, in the absence of the same brain stem
influence, drift towards hyperpolarization, to
deinactivation of low-threshold calcium chan-

nels, and to burst firing. It is during this state
that the influence of the reticular nucleus is
at its strongest in its capacity to entrain relay cell bursts at spindle frequencies and under certain circumstances at lower frequencies. The power of the reticular nucleus in
this regard is substantially enhanced by the
feedback from layer VI neurons of the cerebral cortex, even a single corticothalamic volley being sufficient to set up a spindle oscillation in the thalamus and throughout the entire
thalamo–corticothalamic network. And massive, sustained corticothalamic activity, as in an
epileptiform seizure, may cause the reticular
nucleus to shut off activity altogether in relay
neurons. In mice null for the gene encoding Ttype calcium channels, thalamic relay cells lack
burst discharges and slow wave synchrony and
the animals display resistance to pharmacologically induced spike and wave discharges.21
The reticular nucleus is at its least effective
when during the conscious state relay neurons
are relatively depolarized, their T-channels inactivated, and they are firing tonically. Under
these circumstances the power of the corticothalamic system is brought to bear directly
on the relay cells rather than on the reticular
nucleus. As the membrane potentials of relay
cells become more positive and just before tonic
firing commences, a remarkable ∼40-Hz membrane oscillation is revealed, dependent on
high-threshold (P/Q) calcium channels. When
engaged by corticothalamic synaptic activity,
the tonic firing of the relay cells now becomes
entrained at ∼40 Hz, and this is communicated to the whole thalamo–corticothalamic
network.22,23 In mice null for the genes coding
for P/Q channels, relay cells lack the subthreshold ∼40-Hz oscillations and EEG recordings
show little activity in the gamma range of
frequencies.24
We now recognize that an EEG or electrocorticogram reflects neuronal activity not in the
cerebral cortex alone but in the whole thalamo–
corticothalamic network. The high-amplitude
spindle waves that herald the drift into and out
of slow wave sleep have their origins in the

17

Jones: Thalamocortical Synchrony

Figure 5. Synchrony of the thalamus and cortex. The schematic view shows how assemblies of thalamic and cortical neurons firing synchronously can be formed under the influence
of coincident inputs of the core and matrix projections to cortical pyramidal cells of all layers
and how re-entrant corticothalamic circuitry can maintain a local assembly. In addition, because of the divergence of the matrix projection and of the layer V corticothalamic projection,
activity in one assembly can be transferred to new assemblies across the cortex and thalamus.
(From Jones [2007]1 ; based in part on Llinas
´ and Par´e [1997].35 )

thalamus, and slower waves in the delta range
can be generated in the cortex or thalamus. The
lower-voltage waves in the gamma range (20–
80 Hz) that lie within what was once regarded
as a “desynchronized” EEG and which are typical of attentive wakefulness are now recognized as accompaniments of directed attention,
perception, and higher cognitive states. Magnetoencephalography demonstrates the movement of gamma oscillations across the cerebral
cortex during conscious perception,25 and the
power spectrum of gamma band activity is reduced in areas such as the prefrontal cortex
in psychosis.26 Recognizing that the EEG is a
reflection of the activity of many hundreds or
thousands of cortical and thalamic cells firing
synchronously, it is incumbent upon us to attempt to explain how assemblies of thalamic
and cortical neurons that fire synchronously in
the gamma range can be formed and how the
synchronous activity can be transferred to new
assemblies as a substrate for the movement of
activity across the cortex during the process
of “binding” all the elements of an experience
into a single cognitive event. The re-entrant
circuitry (Fig. 5) provided by the layer VI corticothalamic cells appears to be a key element

in the establishment of local assemblies of thalamic and cortical neurons, ensuring that any
40-Hz activity generated in tonically firing relay cells and communicated to the layer VI cells
by their monosynaptic thalamocortical inputs
will be re-entered at the relay cells and the oscillations reinforced. The somewhat divergent
thalamic terminations of layer VI corticothalamic axons should recruit other relay cells into
an assembly, including both focally projecting
core cells and diffusely projecting matrix cells.
At the cortical level, relay cell oscillation will
be conveyed via monosynaptic inputs to middle layers, that is, to pyramidal cells of layers
III–VI, and the terminations of the axons of
matrix cells in superficial layers on the apical
dendritic sprays of these cells should set up a
coincidence detection circuit that will further
reinforce synchrony in the assembly. The engagement of new assemblies and the spread of
activity across assemblies would in this scheme
occur via layer V corticothalamic projections
to new thalamic nuclei and via matrix cells to
their cognate cortical areas (Fig. 6). Eventually,
in this view, the whole dorsal thalamus and
cerebral cortex could be engaged in synchronous gamma frequency oscillations.

18

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences

Figure 6. Schematic illustration of how corticothalamic fibers arising from layer V cells
of one cortical area and projecting to nuclei of the pulvinar other than that which provides
input to that cortical area could serve to provide a series of cortico–thalamocortical loops that
parallel the hierarchical progression of cortico–cortical connections from a primary sensory
area (area A) to other cortical areas (areas B and C, etc.). (From Jones [2007]1 .)

Interpolations of an abnormal, lowerfrequency rhythm at some point, such as one induced in the ventral lateral anterior nucleus by
heightened inhibitory inputs from the internal
segment of the globus pallidus in Parkinson’s
disease, would potentially disrupt the normal
sequence and cause a disturbance of behavior,
e.g., tremors in the case of Parkinson’s disease,
or an abnormal sensory experience, perhaps
pain, in the case of altered input from the periphery. Other comparable thalamic dysrhythmias may be the accompaniments of psychotic
states and could potentially be the basis of
hallucinations.
Two Classes of Corticothalamic
Neurons
The cerebral cortex provides feedback to
the thalamus via the projections of two distinct

classes of pyramidal cells with somata located in
different layers. The majority of cells projecting
to a particular thalamic nucleus have somata located in layer VI of the cortical area receiving
input from that nucleus. A smaller number are
found in layer V of the same area and project
mainly to different although functionally related thalamic nuclei (reviewed by Steriade et
al. [1997]27 and Jones [2007]1 ). The layer VI
and layer V corticothalamic cells have very different morphologies, and their axons have different patterns of ramification and termination
in the thalamus as well as collateral branches,
with very different distributions within the parent area of the cortex (Fig. 7).
Corticothalamic neurons of layer VI are
small, pyramidal cells with a narrow, vertical
dendritic field that ends in the middle layers
of the cortex among the terminations of thalamocortical fibers from which the cell receives

Jones: Thalamocortical Synchrony

19

Figure 7. Camera lucid drawings of corticothalamic cells in the auditory cortex of the cat, intracellularly
labeled with horseradish peroxidase or biocytin. Corticothalamic cells in layer VI have a vertical organization
of intracortical axon collaterals, while corticothalamic cells in layer V have a horizontal distribution of intracortical collaterals. The inset shows the terminal distribution of axons of layer VI and layer V corticothalamic
cells in the thalamus, illustrating the focused nature of a layer VI projection, with collaterals in the reticular
nucleus, and distributed nature of a layer V projection without collaterals in the reticular nucleus. (From Jones
[2007]1 ; based on Ojima et al . [1992]28 and Ojima [1994]29 ).

monosynaptic inputs from the thalamus. The
axon of a layer VI corticothalamic cell, before leaving the cortex, gives off two or three
recurrent collaterals which ascend within the
confines of the vertical dendritic field of the
cell.28,29 Each cell, therefore, influences a relatively narrow zone of the cortical area in which
it lies. The principal axon of the cell projects
subcortically only to the thalamus. As it traverses the reticular nucleus it gives off one or
two short collaterals in the reticular nucleus.
On entering the dorsal thalamic nucleus from
which its parent cortical area receives input, it
terminates in a relatively narrow zone, in appropriate topographic order. Although ending
in a relatively restricted zone of the related thalamic nucleus, the terminals of a single layer
VI corticothalamic cell can apparently influence thalamic relay cells that project to regions
of cortex outside the narrow cortical zone in
which it resides.30 For example, a corticothalamic axon projecting to the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus can influence an extent of the visual
field representation in the lateral geniculate nu-

cleus many times greater than that represented
in the cortical column in which its parent cell
resides. In another example, fibers derived from
a cell located beneath a single cortical barrel in
the somatosensory cortex extend terminals in
the ventral posterior nucleus of the thalamus
into regions adjacent to the cluster of cells that
provides input to that cortical barrel, and thus
into thalamic regions representing other facial
vibrissae.31,32
Corticothalamic cells whose somata lie in
layer V are characterized by far more extensive axonal ramifications in the cortex and thalamus. The layer V cells are large, pyramidal
in form and have a thick apical dendrite that
ascends to layer I of the cortex, where it ends
in a tuft of branches (Fig. 7). The axon gives
off a number of long horizontal collaterals that
extend for a great distance through layers III
and V of the cortex and then descends to the
thalamus and to other subcortical sites, such as
the tectum, other parts of the brain stem, or the
spinal cord. Unlike the axon of a layer VI corticothalamic cell, the axon of a layer V cell does

20

not give off collaterals to the reticular nucleus
and within the dorsal thalamus its terminations
are not restricted to the nucleus from which its
parent cortical area receives inputs. The terminations extend into one or more adjacent
nuclei, although in each nucleus the terminals
can be more highly focused than those of the
axons of layer VI cells. The axons terminate
in small numbers of large boutons, quite unlike
the numerous small boutons of layer VI corticothalamic cells. These larger boutons often
enter into synaptic relationships with relay cells
that resemble those of ascending afferent fibers
rather than those of the terminals of the layer
VI cells. The additional nuclei receiving input
from layer V corticothalamic cells commonly
include those of the intralaminar system, but
nuclei of the pulvinar–lateral posterior complex and the dorsal and magnocellular nuclei
of the medial geniculate complex are also targets. A common feature is that these additional
target nuclei are commonly those in which the
calbindin matrix of thalamic cells is most highly
represented.
The focusing of the layer V corticothalamic projection in comparison with the more
divergent layer VI projection does not imply
a greater degree of topographic specificity, for
the axons of these cells, in addition to their terminations in the thalamus, have terminations
in the striatum, brain stem, and even spinal
cord. And, their intracortical projections are
widespread, unlike those of the layer VI cells,
which are highly columnar. The chief function of the layer V cells may, therefore, be
more in the nature of a general activator of
the thalamus in conjunction with the rest of
the brain. Because the layer V-originating axons do not innervate the reticular nucleus, they
have direct excitatory access to the relay neurons of the dorsal thalamus. Hence, the layer V
corticothalamic projection may serve both as
a means of directing attention during wakefulness and as a basis for a “wake-up call” during sleep and inattentiveness. The offsetting of
the layer V projection from the primary thalamic source of input to a cortical area and

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences

especially its predilection for the matrix of the
dorsal thalamus could be an important means
of bringing attention to bear upon the context
under which the content of a sensory message
is being relayed through the primary nucleus.
Despite the preceding comments, the layer
VI-originating corticothalamic projection cannot be seen as subservient to the layer Voriginating projection or simply as a “modulator” of thalamic relay function. The layer VI
corticothalamic projection can operate most
powerfully in both the sleeping and the alert
states.33,34 In the former, when it is focused
on the reticular nucleus and its influence over
the hyperpolarized relay cells is weak, the effect of corticothalamic stimulation is strong
disynaptic inhibition of the relay cells, and
in this it promotes low-frequency oscillations
in the cortico–thalamocortical network as the
cells begin to burst. In wakefulness, the excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) elicited
by the layer VI corticothalamic projection become more effective because of the functional
expression of high-threshold calcium channels
in the dendrites and the corticothalamic system
now serves to entrain the natural ∼40-Hz intrinsic oscillations of the cells, thus setting up
and maintaining high-frequency synchronous
activity in the thalamocortical network as described above.
Interactions of Core and Matrix
Cells and Corticothalamic
Projections in Promoting
Widespread Synchrony in the
Thalamo–Corticothalamic Network
The relay cells that make up the core of the
thalamus have focused projections to an individual cortical area and form the basis for the
relay of place- and modality-specific information to the cortex. Those of the matrix form a
basis for the dispersion of activity in the thalamocortical network across larger areas of cortex.
Within a zone of cortex, the terminations of
core cell axons on more-proximal dendrites in
middle layers and those of matrix cell axons

21

Jones: Thalamocortical Synchrony

on distal dendrites in superficial layers form a
coincidence detection circuit that should provide a high degree of temporal integration between inputs coming from the core and matrix
cells35 (Fig. 6). Coincidence of inputs should
promote synchronous activity in the cells of
cortical columns activated by a peripheral or
internally generated stimulus. Activity in these
columns should then be returned via layer VI
corticothalamic cells to the thalamic nucleus
from which they receive input, and thus thalamocortical synchrony would be reinforced. Activity would be spread to other cortical columns
in the same cortical area and to those in adjacent cortical areas via the diffuse projections of
matrix cells in the thalamic nucleus that was
first activated and to which the layer VI projection returns. Other thalamic nuclei would
be recruited via the more widespread corticothalamic projection of layer V neurons and
then, through the cortical projections of matrix cells in these nuclei, other cortical areas
would become involved (Fig. 6). Intracortical
spread of synchrony would also be promoted by
the widespread horizontal collaterals of layer
V corticothalamic cells within the cortex. By
means of the systematic recruitment of cortical
and thalamic cells by layer V corticothalamic
cells and by thalamic matrix cells, large-scale,
coherent activity would be set up throughout
large regions of cortex in response to an externally or internally generated stimulus. In this
way temporary functional links would be provided between discrete populations of cortical
and thalamic cells in the process of binding the
different aspects of a stimulus into a single experiential event.25,36–40 The links would be broken
as an oscillation faded but could be reformed
in new patterns in response to new external or
internal inputs to the thalamus. Coherency of
fast (20- to 40-Hz) activity in the cerebral cortex and thalamus has been demonstrated by
multisite recording of field potentials and intracellular activities in different neocortical areas41,42 and within thalamic nuclei connected
with these areas by thalamocortical and corticothalamic connections.43

In the cortex of awake humans, highfrequency cerebral oscillations accompanying
cognitive events tend to engage areas of the
cortex that, although large, are regionally restricted, as though representing input through a
single thalamic relay nucleus. During a discrete
conscious event, 40-Hz activity, as revealed in
magnetoencephalographic traces, being at first
regionally restricted, moves across the cortex
as new areas are recruited,44 as though following the progression of cortico–thalamocortical
recruitment predicted above. The spread of
activity predicted is also consistent with the
time course of peripherally elicited or internally
generated sensory experiences.25,45,46 Cortico–
cortical connections undoubtedly play a prominent role as well, but they are seen as running
parallel to a system of cortico–thalamocortical
loops in spreading activity across the cortex and
thalamus (Fig. 6).
Acknowledgments

This work was supported by grant numbers
NS 21377 and NS 39094 from the National
Institutes of Health, US Public Health Service.
Conflicts of Interest

The author declares no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Jones, E.G. 2007. The Thalamus, 2nd ed. Cambridge
University Press. Cambridge, UK.
2. Jones, E.G. & S.H.C. Hendry. 1989. Differential calcium binding protein immunoreactivity distinguishes
classes of relay neurons in monkey thalamic nuclei.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 1: 222–246.
3. Rausell, E. & E.G. Jones. 1991. Chemically distinct
compartments of the thalamic VPM nucleus in monkeys relay principal and spinal trigeminal pathways
to different layers of the somatosensory cortex. J. Neurosci. 11: 226–237.
4. Jones, E.G. 1998. Viewpoint: The core and matrix of
thalamic organization. Neuroscience 85: 331–345.
5. Jones, E.G. 2001. The thalamic matrix and thalamocortical synchrony. Trends Neurosci. 24: 593–599.

22

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences

6. Friedlander, M.J., C.-S. Lin, L.R. Stanford, et al.
1981. Morphology of functionally identified neurons
in lateral geniculate nucleus of cat. J. Neurophysiol. 46:
80–129.
7. Wilson, J.R., M.J. Friedlander & S.M. Sherman.
1984. Fine structural morphology of identified Xand Y-cells in the cat’s lateral geniculate nucleus. Proc.
R. Soc. Lond. B 221: 411–436.
8. Liu, X.B. 1995. Distribution of four types of synapse
on physiologically identified relay neurons in the ventral posterior thalamic nucleus of the cat. J. Comp.
Neurol. 352: 69–91.
9. Liu, X.-B., R.A. Warren & E.G. Jones. 1995. Synaptic distribution of afferents from reticular nucleus in
ventroposterior nucleus of cat thalamus. J. Comp. Neurol. 352: 187–202.
10. Liu, X.-B. & E.G. Jones. 1999. Predominance of corticothalamic synaptic inputs to thalamic reticular nucleus neurons in the rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 414: 67–
79.
11. Golshani, P., X.-B. Liu & E.G. Jones. 2001. Differences in quantal amplitude reflect GluR4- subunit
number at corticothalamic synapses on two populations of thalamic neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
98: 4172–4177.
12. Liu, X.-B., S. Bolea, P. Golshani, et al. 2001. Differentiation of corticothalamic and thalamocortical
collateral synapses on mouse reticular nucleus neurons by EPSC amplitude and AMPA receptor subunit
composition. Thalamus Rel. Syst. 1: 15–29.
13. Livingstone, M.S. & D.H. Hubel. 1981. Effects of
sleep and arousal on the processing visual information in the cat. Nature 291: 554–561.
14. Llin´as, R. & H. Jahnsen. 1982. Electrophysiology of
mammalian thalamic neurons in vitro. Nature 297:
406–408.
15. Jahnsen, H. & R. Llin´as. 1984. Electrophysiological
studies of guinea-pig thalamic neurones: An in vitro
study. J. Physiol. 349: 205–226.
16. Jahnsen, H. & R. Llin´as. 1984. Ionic basis for the
electroresponsiveness and oscillatory properties of
guinea-pig thalamic neurones in vitro. J. Physiol. 349:
227–248.
17. Deschˆenes, M., M. Paradis, J.P. Roy, et al. 1984. Electrophysiology of neurons of lateral thalamic nuclei in
cat: Resting properties and burst discharges. J. Neurophysiol. 51: 1196–1219.
18. Roy, J.P., M. Clercq, M. Steriade, et al. 1984. Electrophysiology of neurons of lateral thalamic nuclei in
cat: Mechanisms of long-lasting hyperpolarizations.
J. Neurophysiol. 51: 1220–1235.
19. McCormick, D.A. & T. Bal. 1997. Sleep and arousal:
Thalamocortical mechanisms. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 20:
185–215.
20. Steriade, M. 2003. Neuronal Substrates of Sleep and

Epilepsy. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge,
UK.
Kim, D., I. Song, S. Keum, et al. 2001. Lack of the
burst firing of thalamocortical relay neurons and resistance to absence seizures in mice lacking α1G Ttype Ca2+ channels. Neuron 31: 35–45.
Pedroarena, C. & R. Llin´as. 1997. Dendritic calcium
conductances generate high-frequency oscillation in
thalamocortical neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:
24–728.
Pedroarena, C.M. & R. Llin´as. 2001. Interactions
of synaptic and intrinsic electroresponsiveness determine corticothalamic activation dynamics. Thalamus
Rel. Syst. 1: 3–14.
Llin´as, R.R, S. Choi, F.J. Urbano, et al. 2007.
Gamma-band deficiency and abnormal thalamocortical activity in P/Q-type channel mutant mice. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104: 17819–17824.
Llin´as, R., U. Ribary, D. Contreras, et al. 1998. The
neuronal basis for consciousness. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B 353: 1841–1849.
Cho, R.Y., R.O. Konecky & C.S. Carter. 2006. Impairments in frontal cortical γ synchrony and cognitive control in schizophrenia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
103: 19878–19883.
Steriade, M., E.G. Jones & D.A. McCormick. 1997.
Thalamic organization and chemical neuroanatomy.
In Thalamus, vol. 1: 31–174. Elsevier. Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
Ojima, H., C.N. Honda & E.G. Jones. 1992. Characteristics of intracellularly injected infragranular pyramidal neurons in cat primary auditory cortex. Cereb.
Cortex 2: 197–216.
Ojima, H. 1994. Terminal morphology and distribution of corticothalamic fibers originating from layers
5 and 6 of cat primary auditory cortex. Cereb. Cortex
4: 646–665.
Murphy, P.C. & A.M. Sillito. 1996. Functional morphology of the feedback pathway from area 17 of the
cat visual cortex to the lateral geniculate nucleus. J.
Neurosci. 16: 1180–1192.
Hoogland, P.V., E. Welker & H. Van Der Loos. 1987.
Organization of the projections from barrel cortex
to thalamus in mice studied with Phaseolus vulgarisleucoagglutinin and HRP. Exp. Brain Res. 68: 73–
87.
Bourassa, J., D. Pinault & M. Deschˆenes. 1995. Corticothalamic projections from the cortical barrel field
to the somatosensory thalamus in rats: A single-fibre
study using biocytin as an anterograde tracer. Eur. J.
Neurosci. 7: 19–30.
Contreras, D., A. Destexhe, T.J. Sejinowski, et al.
1996. Control of spatiotemporal coherence of a thalamic oscillation by corticothalamic feedback. Science
274: 771–774.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

23

Jones: Thalamocortical Synchrony
34. Contreras, D. & M. Steriade. 1997. Synchronization of low-frequency rhythms in corticothalamic networks. Neuroscience 76: 11–24.
35. Llin´as, R.R. & D. Par´e. 1997. Coherent oscillations
in specific and non-specific thalamocortical networks
and their role in cognition. In Thalamus: Experimental
and Clinical Aspects, vol. II. M. Steriade, E.G. Jones &
D.A. McCormick, Eds.: 501–516. Elsevier. Amsterdam, Netherlands.
36. Gray, C.M., P. K¨onig, A.K. Engel, et al. 1989. Oscillatory responses in cat visual cortex exhibit intercolumnar synchronization which reflects global stimulus properties. Nature 338: 334–337.
37. Singer, W. & C.M. Gray. 1995. Visual feature integration and the temporal correlation hypothesis.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18: 555–586.
38. Gray, C.M., A.K. Engel, P. Koenig, et al. 1990.
Stimulus-dependent neuronal oscillations in cat visual cortex: Receptive field properties and feature
dependence. Eur. J. Neurosci. 2: 607–619.
39. Engel, A.K., P.R. Roelfsema, P. Fries, et al. 1997.
Role of the temporal domain for response selection
and perceptual binding. Cereb. Cortex 7: 571–582.
40. Singer, W. 1999. Neuronal synchrony: A versatile

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

code for the definition of relations? Neuron 24: 49–
65.
Steriade, M. & F. Amzica. 1996. Intracortical and
corticothalamic coherency of fast spontaneous oscillations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93: 2533–2538.
Steriade, M., D. Contreras, F. Amzica, et al. 1996.
Synchronization of fast (30–40 Hz) spontaneous oscillations in intrathalamic and thalamocortical networks. J. Neurosci. 16: 2788–2808.
Steriade, M., D. Contreras, F. Amzica, et al. 1996.
Synchronization of fast (30–40 Hz) spontaneous cortical rhythms during brain activation. J. Neurosci. 16:
392–417.
Ribary, U., A.A. Ioannides, K.D. Singh, et al. 1991.
Magnetic field tomography of coherent thalamocortical 40-Hz oscillations in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 88: 11037–11041.
Desmedt, J.E. & C. Tomberg. 1994. Transient phaselocking of 40 Hz electrical oscillations in prefrontal
and parietal human cortex reflects the process of conscious somatic perception. Neurosci. Lett. 168: 126–
129.
Tononi, G. & G.M. Edelman. 1998. Consciousness
and complexity. Science 282: 1846–1851.

