State-Dependent Architecture
of Thalamic Reticular Subnetworks
Michael M. Halassa,1,2,3,4,* Zhe Chen,3 Ralf D. Wimmer,1,2,3,4 Philip M. Brunetti,4 Shengli Zhao,5 Basilis Zikopoulos,6
Fan Wang,5 Emery N. Brown,7,8,9,10 and Matthew A. Wilson4
1Neuroscience

Institute, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA
of Neuroscience & Physiology, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA
3Department of Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA
4Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
5Department of Cell Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA
6Department of Health Sciences and Program in Neuroscience, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA
7Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA
8Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
9Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
10Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Institute of Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
*Correspondence: michael.halassa@nyumc.org
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.025
2Department

SUMMARY

Behavioral state is known to influence interactions
between thalamus and cortex, which are important
for sensation, action, and cognition. The thalamic
reticular nucleus (TRN) is hypothesized to regulate
thalamo-cortical interactions, but the underlying
functional architecture of this process and its state
dependence are unknown. By combining the first
TRN ensemble recording with psychophysics and
connectivity-based optogenetic tagging, we found
reticular circuits to be composed of distinct subnetworks. While activity of limbic-projecting TRN
neurons positively correlates with arousal, sensoryprojecting neurons participate in spindles and show
elevated synchrony by slow waves during sleep.
Sensory-projecting neurons are suppressed by
attentional states, demonstrating that their gating of
thalamo-cortical interactions is matched to behavioral state. Bidirectional manipulation of attentional
performance was achieved through subnetwork-specific optogenetic stimulation. Together, our findings
provide evidence for differential inhibition of thalamic
nuclei across brain states, where the TRN separately
controls external sensory and internal limbic processing facilitating normal cognitive function.
INTRODUCTION
How does the brain switch between processing of information
originating from different sources to successfully guide behavior? How does it flexibly shift between processing external
stimuli and internal constructs to optimize cognitive perfor808 Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

mance? Answers to these questions will not only enhance our
understanding of the neural basis of cognition but will also refine
our concepts of brain disorders in which cognitive dysfunction is
central (Stefansson et al., 2014). In humans, the shift between
external and internal goal-directed cognition is known to recruit
distinct cortical networks (Buckner and Krienen, 2013). For
example, the default mode network, which includes medial prefrontal cortex, is suppressed during tasks that demand external
attention but activated when subjects perform internally guided
behaviors (Spreng et al., 2010). In contrast, the dorsal attentional
network, which includes dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, is activated during external attention (Fox et al., 2005). Electrophysiological recordings in nonhuman primates have shown that
interactions among circuits of the dorsal attentional network
are achieved through synchronous oscillatory dynamics (Miller
and Buschman, 2013). Prefrontal regions lead parietal regions
in top-down attention, whereas parietal regions lead prefrontal
ones in bottom-up attention (Buschman and Miller, 2007).
Although the circuit mechanisms underlying the establishment
of these cortical oscillatory dynamic states are incompletely understood, recent experiments have shown that the thalamus
may play a central role in cortico-cortical synchrony required
for cognitive performance (Saalmann et al., 2012). These findings
add to established knowledge on the role of thalamus in regulating cortical dynamics in sleep (Magnin et al., 2010; Steriade
and Llina´s, 1988) but raise important mechanistic questions on
how it regulates cortical activity in an arousal state-dependent
manner, a prerequisite to understanding its precise role in
cognitive function. Also, because the thalamus is functionally
segregated into different nuclei (Jones, 2002), it may allow for establishing a multitude of cortical states depending on the type
and number of nuclei engaged during a particular behavior.
Broad shifts in arousal offer an opportunity to study circuit
mechanisms of how the brain switches between processing
external stimuli and internally generated activity. Several studies
have delineated cortical mechanisms by which processing of

sensory information is broadly suppressed during sleep (Issa
and Wang, 2011; Livingstone and Hubel, 1981) but is enhanced
in active waking (Livingstone and Hubel, 1981) and attentional
states (Briggs et al., 2013; Desimone and Duncan, 1995),
whereas others have established mechanisms by which offline
limbic processing of memories is enhanced during sleep and
quiet wakefulness (Buzsa´ki, 2010; Ji and Wilson, 2007; Karlsson
and Frank, 2009). Within this framework, thalamo-cortical
network engagement in processing of different information types
is expected to occur in an arousal state-dependent manner.
The thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN), a group of GABAergic
neurons that provides inhibitory control over thalamic nuclei, is
strategically positioned to selectively modulate thalamo-cortical
interactions (Crick, 1984; Pinault, 2004). In fact, based on its
anatomical connections, Francis Crick postulated that ‘‘if the
thalamus is the gateway to the cortex, the reticular complex might
be described as the guardian of the gateway’’ (Crick, 1984). The
TRN has been implicated in sensory processing where its neurons exhibit complex visual receptive fields (Vaingankar et al.,
2012) and respond to deviant (oddball) auditory stimuli (Yu
et al., 2009). In behaving primates, visual TRN neurons are modulated by selective attention (McAlonan et al., 2008). The TRN has
also been linked to internal processing during sleep, where its activity is associated with sleep rhythms and behavior (Cueni et al.,
2008; Espinosa et al., 2008; Huguenard and McCormick, 2007).
TRN neurons are known to exhibit rhythmicity in relation to spindle oscillations (Steriade et al., 1986), 9–15 Hz dynamics that are
observed in the cortex during sleep, which correlate with sleep
stability (Dang-Vu et al., 2010), and sleep-dependent memory
consolidation (Diekelmann and Born, 2010; Eschenko et al.,
2006). How the TRN operates to support these different statedependent functions is unclear, in part, due to a gap in knowledge
about how its microcircuits are functionally organized. Physiological attributes of thalamic nuclei are known to depend on their
anatomical connections (Jones, 1981), but the TRN has traditionally been viewed as a monolithic structure, with no link between
its connectivity and function. Although recent work in primates
has shown distinct connectivity patterns for sensory and limbic
TRN (Zikopoulos and Barbas, 2012), the impact of these anatomical substrates on thalamo-cortical function has remained unknown given the lack of physiological studies.
We directly addressed this gap in knowledge by recording
from TRN ensembles in naturally behaving mice. Our recordings
revealed a previously unknown functional diversity among TRN
microcircuits. Specifically, two functional subpopulations of
neurons were identified that exhibited opposite modulation by
sleep and attentional states. Connectivity and genetic-based
dissection of these microcircuits revealed an anatomical basis
for this functional segregation. Specifically, sensory-projecting
neurons exhibited activity patterns consistent with inhibition of
sensory processing during sleep but its augmentation during
attentional states, whereas limbic-connected neurons exhibited
little activity during sleep, likely enhancing offline limbic processing. TRN-specific optogenetic manipulations revealed its causal
role in attentional performance, an effect that was recapitulated
by its selective sensory subnetwork manipulation. Together, our
data show that the TRN consists of connectivity-based functional subnetworks that differentially participate in sensory and

limbic processing in a state-dependent manner. This architecture may facilitate switching of cortical information processing
between externally driven and internally generated computations, a basic determinant of cognitive function.
RESULTS
TRN Recordings in the Freely Behaving Preparation
To obtain stable recordings of TRN ensembles in mice during
free behavior, we implanted arrays of adjustable extracellular
recording electrodes targeting the dorsal pole of this brain structure (Figure 1A), which is known to be connected to both anterior
limbic (Cornwall et al., 1990) and visual sensory thalamic nuclei
(Kimura et al., 2012). Electrode position was confirmed by physiological signals obtained during adjustment (Figures 1A–1D),
and postmortem histology (Figures 1E and 1F). TRN neurons
were identified by their thin spike waveform compared to relay
neurons as has been done in recent studies (Gardner et al.,
2013; Halassa et al., 2011) (Figure 1G) and is normally performed
for extracellular inhibitory neuronal identification in cortical (Cardin et al., 2009) and hippocampal recordings (Royer et al., 2012).
Consistent with previous studies, many TRN neurons showed a
bursting spike firing pattern most noticeable during slow wave
sleep (SWS; 128 out of 195; Figures S1A and S1B available online), and about half of these neurons exhibited a particular burst
structure (accelerando decelerando) observed in other species
(Marlinski et al., 2012; Vaingankar et al., 2012) (Figures S1C
and S1D).
TRN Neurons Exhibit Heterogeneous Firing in Relation
to Sleep Spindle Oscillations
One of the major functions attributed to TRN neurons is their role
in generating spindle oscillations (Bazhenov et al., 2000; Contreras et al., 1993; Halassa et al., 2011). We examined the correlation between individual TRN neuronal rate functions and cortical
electroencephalographic (EEG) spindle power in natural SWS
(Figures 2A, S2A and S2B). Consistent with previous findings in
unanesthetized cats (Steriade et al., 1986), we found that many
TRN neurons were positively correlated with spindle power (Figures 2A and S2B). However, surprisingly, we found that others
were negatively correlated with this measure (Figures 2A and
S2B). Analysis of the correlation between TRN neuronal firing
rates and cortical spindle power revealed a bimodal distribution
(Figure 2B; n = 7 mice). Neurons that were positively correlated to
spindle power increased their firing rate specifically during spindle events (Figures 2C–2E; see Figures S2C and S2D for spindle
detection examples), with stronger spindle-phase locking values
observed for these neurons than negatively correlated ones (Figures 2F–2H; see Figures S2E and S2F for unbiased detection of
phase locking). Conversely, neurons that were negatively correlated to spindle power were also negatively correlated to delta
power (Figure S2G) and exhibited a robust elevation in firing
rate with increased arousal (arousal correlated [AC]; Figure 2I).
Thus, in SWS, two functional TRN subpopulations are observed:
one that is spindle correlated (SC) and another that is AC. Equivalent numbers of these neurons were recorded from all animals
with high recording yield, and they exhibited no difference in
overall firing rates or burst properties (Table S1).
Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 809

Figure 1. Independently Adjustable Multielectrode Recordings in the TRN
(A) The dorsal part of TRN was targeted by
implanting an independently adjustable multielectrode implant (16 independently movable microdrives, only 6–12 loaded in any experiment) at a
15-degree angle relative to midline. Numbers
denote different anatomical structures at which
physiological recordings were made and shown in
(B) and (C).
(B) Broadband (0.1 Hz–32 kHz) signal recorded at
the different anatomical stations shows the physiological trajectory of the recordings. Note the
absence of spiking in the two white matter crossings (corpus callosum [2] and internal capsule [4]).
(C) Band-pass filtered signal (600 Hz–10 kHz) of
traces in (B) showing spike trains.
(D) Clustered neurons from traces 1, 3, and 5
showing the waveforms of a putative cortical fastspiking interneuron (top), a striatal medium spiny
neuron (middle), and finally, a TRN neuron (bottom). Highlighted inset shows a burst event of this
unit, exhibiting the accelerando-decelerando
burst structure previously described.
(E) Histological verification of the recording by
electrode track (white arrowheads) and lesion at
the tip (yellow arrowheads).
(F) Distribution of TRN lesions seen across six out
of seven mice recorded. Numbers denote A/P
distance from bregma in millimeters.
(G) A total of 195 putative TRN units with ‘‘thin’’
spikes were recorded (crimson), which had
significantly different spike waveform features
(peak-to-trough time and trough half-width) than
102 putative thalamic units (red).
See also Figure S1.

SC TRN Neurons Exhibit State-Dependent Modulation
Consistent with Regulation of Sensory Processing
SWS is a state in which the cortical surface EEG is dominated by
slow waves in the delta range (0.5–4 Hz). These dynamics are
associated with coordinated changes of excitability across
cortical neurons (Steriade et al., 1993; Vyazovskiy et al., 2009)
and are known to influence excitability in cortically connected
structures (Hahn et al., 2012). We found that TRN neurons
were modulated by cortical delta, with both SC and AC neurons
810 Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

exhibiting comparable delta-phase locking values (Figures 3A–3D). However,
whereas SC neurons showed preferred
firing during delta wave troughs (corresponding to UP states, assessed by
cortical multiunit activity), AC neurons
showed a broad delta-phase distribution (Figures 3E and 3F). The narrow
delta-phase distribution of SC neurons
suggested an enhanced probability of coordinated spiking across this population,
which was confirmed by a SWS-dependent increase in their spike time synchrony (a short-latency cross-correlation
measure; see Experimental Procedures),
compared to AC neurons (Figures 3G–3I and S3). Because sensory processing is known to be suppressed during sleep, this
finding suggested that SC neuronal synchrony participates in
this suppression by inhibiting thalamus. To explore whether
this participation can extend to sensory processing during
wake, we performed exploratory behavioral experiments
requiring animals to detect a sensory stimulus (Kahn et al.,
2012). We found that SC neurons were more likely to reduce their
activity in the attentional phase of this visual detection task

compared to AC neurons (Figure S4). Together, these findings
show selective participation of SC neurons in modulating sensory processing in both sleep and attentional states, suggesting
that their arousal-dependent modulation determines their functional impact.
Optogenetics-Assisted Circuit Dissection of TRN
Neurons Reveals Connectivity-Based Subnetwork
Architecture
Because dorsal TRN projects to both sensory and limbic thalamus (Figure S5), we asked whether functional attributes of SC
and AC neurons were related to patterns of connectivity with
thalamic targets. To enable selective targeting of the TRN, we
used mice that expressed Cre recombinase (Cre) under the vesicular g-aminobutyric acid transporter (VGAT) promoter (Vong
et al., 2011). VGAT-Cre animals enabled selective expression
of transgenes in the TRN, but not nearby thalamic nuclei, which
do not contain VGAT-positive neurons. This was achieved by
injecting adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) containing doublefloxed cassettes, stereotactically into the TRN (Figures S5A–
S5F). To enable targeting of TRN neurons that project to specific
thalamic nuclei, we used lentiviruses. These viruses exhibited
two important attributes that resulted in connectivity-specific
TRN neuronal tagging. First, because they were pseudotyped
with a chimeric envelope protein composed of the extracellular
and transmembrane domains of rabies virus glycoprotein (RG)
and the cytoplasmic domain of vesicular stomatitis virus G protein (VSV-G) (see Experimental Procedures), they were taken up
by axonal terminals in the thalamic target of interest and retrogradely transported. Second, these viruses were engineered to
harbor double-floxed cassettes and, therefore, only resulted in
the expression of transgenes in the TRN when injected in
VGAT-Cre mice (Figures S5H–S5O). Using this strategy, we engineered retrograde lentiviruses (RG-LVs) with double-floxed
cassettes containing the light-activated ion channel channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) (Boyden et al., 2005; Fenno et al., 2011) and injected them into either sensory visual or anterior limbic thalamus
of VGAT-Cre mice (Figures 4A and 4B). We performed extracellular recordings from optogenetically identified TRN neurons in
three visual- and two anterior-injected mice while animals performed a visual detection task and in posttask sleep (Figures
4C and 4E). We identified visual thalamic-projecting or anterior
complex-projecting neurons by their short-latency response to
10 ms pulses of blue laser (5–10 ms onset; Figures 4D and 4F).
Visual-projecting neurons also showed a 30–50 ms latency
response to visual stimulation (Figures 4D and 4F). Electrode positions were additionally confirmed by postmortem histology
(Figures 4G and 4H).
We found that visual-projecting TRN neurons were functionally
different from limbic-projecting ones. Specifically, visual-connected neurons were mostly SC (Figure 5A), whereas limbic-projecting neurons were AC (Figures 5B and 5C). Visual-projecting
neurons exhibited significantly higher phase locking to spindles
than limbic-projecting neurons (Figure 5D). Consistent with a
role for visual-projecting TRN in state-dependent control of visual processing, these neurons exhibited elevated pairwise
spike time synchrony in SWS, whereas limbic-projecting neurons did not (Figure 5E).

To investigate the participation of these subnetworks in information processing beyond sleep, we trained mice on a visual
detection task that required attentional engagement. The task
required the animal to correctly detect a visual stimulus
(500 ms) and subsequently move toward it, obtaining food
from a reward site positioned underneath the stimulus location.
A white noise auditory stimulus signaled the ability to initiate a
trial. A trial was successfully initiated when the mouse broke
an infrared beam continuously for 500–700 ms, ensuring proper
head orientation during visual stimulus presentation. To minimize
impulsive poking, rewards were only made available for a period
of 15 s following successful initiation (Figure 5F). The absence of
a correlation between initiation time and latency to collect reward
as well as elevated latency during catch trials confirmed timely
and specific response to visual stimulus presentation (Figures
S6A–S6C). We found a robust and specific reduction in firing
rate for visual-projecting TRN neurons following trial initiation,
but no significant modulation of limbic-projecting TRN neurons
during the task (Figure 5G). This result is consistent with the
engagement of visual TRN subnetwork in state-dependent sensory visual processing. Furthermore, because the modulation
occurred in the period prior to stimulus presentation, it suggested the participation of these neurons in attentional states,
where visual thalamic inhibition may be transiently reduced to
augment subsequent sensory processing.
Temporally Precise TRN Activation Diminishes
Performance on the Visual Detection Task
To investigate whether the observed TRN neuronal firing rate
changes were causal for visual detection task performance, we
employed optogenetic manipulations. First, we injected a Credependent AAV (serotype 2)-expressing channelrhodopsin into
the TRN of VGAT-Cre mice, which resulted in selective TRN
expression (Figure 6A). Because visual TRN neurons exhibited
reduction in firing rate between task initiation and stimulus presentation, we used optogenetic activation to offset this reduction. Our investigations showed that pulse trains of >40 Hz (4–
5 mW, 200 mm fiber [140–180 mW/mm]) result in sustained elevation of TRN neuronal firing rates and a concomitant reduction in
their thalamic targets (Figure 6B). We therefore used pulse trains
of 50 Hz frequency, pulse width 2 ms (duty cycle, 10%), to
achieve a broad elevation of TRN firing rates throughout the initiation as well as stimulus presentation period (task stimulation).
We found that this optogenetic stimulation regime resulted in a
robust prolongation of latencies to collect reward in all mice
examined (Figures 6C, 6E, S6D, and S6E; Movie S1). This suggested that enhancing TRN neuronal firing rate during the window of elevated attentional demands was detrimental to
behavior, supporting the notion that a sharp drop in a subset
of TRN neuronal firing rates was important for optimal performance. To test whether the optogenetic effect was a result of
diminished stimulus perception, we delivered a laser stimulation
train of similar length that started upon stimulus presentation but
avoided the initiation period (Figure 6B). We found that this control stimulation did not impact performance on the task. Furthermore, in support of the specificity of the optogenetic effect to the
initiation period, we found that pulse trains of only 500 ms limited
to the postinitiation window resulted in diminished task
Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 811

(legend on next page)

812 Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

performance (Figures S6D and S6E). Also consistent with the
notion that TRN stimulation did not interfere with stimulus
perception, we found that this stimulation did not change the
overall error rates in the task (Figures S6D and S6E).
Temporally Precise TRN Inhibition Enhances Attentional
Performance
The negative impact of TRN stimulation on task performance
was consistent with the requirement for a subset of its neurons
to reduce their firing rate during the attentional window. To fully
test the causality of these physiological observations in the
context of the task, we used eNpHR3.0 (Deisseroth and Schnitzer, 2013; Tye et al., 2011), a light-activated ClÀ pump that is
known to hyperpolarize neurons and inhibit spiking, to determine
whether further reducing TRN firing rate would improve performance. To increase the likelihood of observing a behavioral
modulation, we subjected mice to mild sleep deprivation (1–
3 hr, at the beginning of their rest phase), which resulted in
slightly diminished task performance evident by prolonged latencies (p < 0.05, rank sum test). Consistent with a causal role
for TRN neurons in optimal task performance, we found that optogenetic inhibition of these neurons resulted in improved performance in all mice examined (Figures 6F–6H, S6F, and S6G;
Movie S2).
To test whether these effects were subnetwork specific, we
performed bidirectional optogenetic manipulations in retrogradely labeled TRN neuronal populations during the task
(Figure 6I). We retrogradely labeled visual-connected and
limbic-connected TRN neurons with either ChR2 or eNpHR3.0.
We found that ChR2-mediated activation of the visual-projecting
TRN during the attentional window of the visual detection task
diminished performance, whereas its inhibition augmented performance. In contrast, neither activation nor inhibition of limbicprojecting TRN impacted performance (Figure 6J), consistent
with the observation that these neurons are not significantly
modulated during that phase of the task (Figure 5). These data
also suggest that earlier results obtained with bidirectional manipulations of the TRN may be fully explained by effects on sensory-projecting neurons, a population that overlaps with the SC
neurons identified earlier in this study. Our findings are unlikely to
be explained by differences in optogenetic targeting because
comparable proportions of TRN neurons were tagged in these
two preparations (anterior projecting, 31 out of 100; visual projecting, 52 out of 190). In addition, there was no impact on error

rates for any of these manipulations. Because the observed effects could be explained by neither sensory nor motor deficits,
we suggest that they are likely cognitive. Also, because they
occurred during the stimulus expectation period of the task,
they are consistent with the involvement of TRN neurons in attentional states.
DISCUSSION
A major attribute of cognitive function is the ability to flexibly
switch between processing different types of information. Broad
shifts in arousal states offer an opportunity to examine how the
brain switches from external stimulus processing during wake
to internal memory processing during sleep. By regulating the interactions within thalamo-cortical networks, the TRN has been
hypothesized to play an important role in cognitive function (Zikopoulos and Barbas, 2012). However, the precise nature of
this regulation has been difficult to discern given the relative
inaccessibility of TRN to physiological recordings. As such,
and in the absence of concrete experimental data, the TRN
has traditionally been viewed as a monolithic structure, providing
uniform inhibition to thalamic nuclei (Crick, 1984; Llina´s and Steriade, 2006). In such a regime, it is unclear how the brain would be
able to selectively control the interactions between functionally
segregated thalamic nuclei and their cortical targets.
In this study, we have systematically examined the functional
architecture of the TRN in the freely behaving mouse. We found
that the TRN is composed of functionally segregated subnetworks defined by anatomical connectivity. Sensory-projecting
TRN regulates sensory processing in a state-dependent
manner, whereas limbic-projecting TRN exhibits little activity
during quiescent states, perhaps enabling the engagement of
its thalamic target in offline processing associated with other
limbic circuits (e.g., hippocampal reactivation). Additionally,
inhibiting sensory-projecting TRN neurons during attentional
states results in enhanced performance on a visual discrimination task, identifying this subnetwork as a possible target for
cognitive enhancement (evident by reduced latency for sensory
detection). Overall, our data show that the functional architecture of TRN subnetworks may have essential roles in mediating
the impact of arousal states on higher-level cognitive function
(Koch, 1993) and that it may be utilized in state-dependent
switching between sensory transmission and offline processing
(Figure 7).

Figure 2. Functional Segregation of TRN Subnetworks in SWS
(A) Two simultaneously recorded TRN neurons with time-varying firing rates that are positively and negatively correlated with cortical spindle power.
(B) Bimodal distribution (Hartigan’s dip test, p < 10À5) of this correlation across the data set (n = 195 TRN neurons, 7 mice). Gray represents the undetermined
group (Experimental Procedures).
(C) Example of a detected EEG spindle.
(D) Peri-event time histogram (PETH) triggered by the onset of cortical spindles showing elevated firing rate of a positively correlated neuron (determined by
analysis similar to A) during spindle events.
(E) This is significant across that population (p < 10À8, rank sum test).
(F) Two positively correlated (to spindle power, as in A) TRN neuronal spike trains in relation to a spindle event.
(G) Spindle-phase histograms of two TRN neurons (red indicates negatively correlated; blue indicates positively correlated to spindle power, as in A). Note the
higher phase locking for the positive-correlated neuron in this example.
(H) Tendency for higher spindle-phase locking in these neurons as a group (weighted mean ± SEM; rank sum test, p = 0.05 at the point of maximum modulation).
(I) Negatively correlated neurons are wake active (p < 0.01, rank sum test), whereas positively correlated neurons are state indifferent (p < 0.0001).
See also Figure S2 and Table S1.

Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 813

Figure 3. Enhanced Synchrony of SC Neurons during SWS
(A) During SWS, SC neuronal spiking occurs near
cortical delta wave troughs.
(B and C) Spike delta-phase histogram of a SC
neuron shows reduction of firing near the delta
wave peaks.
(D) As a population, SC neurons exhibit comparable delta-phase locking to AC neurons (shaded
area denotes the group SEM), shown in the depth
of their spike-phase modulation (SPM).
(E) Delta wave peak-aligned PETH of the SC
population (blue trace) shows stronger phase
alignment to cortical delta oscillations than the AC
population (red trace). Shaded area is SEM.
(F) Finding in (E) is further supported by plotting the
histogram of the phase values (relative to delta
wave peak) at which significantly modulated
neurons exhibit minimum spike count. These distributions are significantly different (two-sample
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, p < 0.03). Note the
peak in the SC neuron histogram, showing that
these neurons exhibit little spiking around the
peaks of delta oscillations.
(G) Example of spike time synchrony between two
SC neurons (shaded area indicates À50 and 50 ms
centered at zero lag) showing increased synchrony in SWS.
(H) Spike time synchrony (converted to Z score
related to baseline) seen at the ensemble level
(examples from four mice). Note the consistent
overall elevation of spike time synchrony among
SC units (mouse 1, n = 8; mouse 5, n = 7; mouse 6,
n = 5; and mouse 7, n = 9) during SWS compared
to wakefulness.
(I) Group analysis of these ensembles (SC: n = 13
ensembles from 4 mice, upper panel; AC: n = 9
ensembles from 4 mice, lower panel) shows an
increase in SC subnetwork synchrony during
SWS. Color bar indicates Z score. p values were
obtained from signed-rank tests.
See also Figure S3.

Functionally Distinct TRN Subnetworks
Our initial recordings were in the dorso-rostral part of the
mouse TRN (Figure 1), where reticular neurons are known to
project to anterior (Cornwall et al., 1990) as well as visual sen814 Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

sory nuclei (Kimura et al., 2012) (Figure S5). In agreement with previous
recordings in cats (Steriade et al.,
1986), we found that many TRN neurons
increased their firing rate with elevation
in cortical spindle power. Our subsequent finding that visual sensory TRN
neurons are likely to exhibit this attribute
as well as phase lock to spindles is
consistent with recordings from the
somatosensory TRN in freely behaving
rats (Marks and Roffwarg, 1993). The
finding of a separate subpopulation of
TRN neurons (AC) is unexpected, and
its link to limbic processing might have been previously missed
because earlier studies did not target limbic-projecting sectors
of the TRN. In contrast to sensory-projecting TRN neurons,
these neurons exhibited broad modulation by arousal state

Figure 4. Optogenetic Tagging of TRN Neurons Based on Their Thalamic Targets
(A) Cartoon depiction of optogenetic tagging of visually connected TRN neurons in mice. A RG-LV containing a Cre-dependent ChR2-EYFP is injected into the
visual thalamus of a VGAT-Cre mouse. Two to 4 weeks later, ChR2 is robustly expressed in visually connected TRN.
(B) Tagging of anterior complex-connected TRN, a similar procedure as in (A).
(C) Sections showing extracellular recording targets for visually connected TRN (n = 3 mice).
(D) Peri-stimulus time histograms (PSTHs) from two visual-tagged TRN neurons, showing optogenetic drive with short-latency responses (top) and visual drive
with longer-latency responses (bottom).
(E and F) Similar depictions as in (C) and (D) but for anterior complex-projecting neurons.
(G) Example brain sections showing electrolytic lesions of electrode tips for visually connected TRN preparation. Confocal image on the right shows electrode tips
(white asterisk) near neurons expressing ChR2-EYFP (yellow arrowheads).
(H) Similar figures to (G) but for anterior complex-tagged TRN neurons.

as seen in cortical (Vyazovskiy et al., 2009) and thalamocortical neurons (Weyand et al., 2001). Functional divergence
of sensory and limbic TRN subnetworks was further evident
during behavior in the visual detection task, where sensory
neurons showed a sharp reduction in firing rate following task
initiation (Figure 5), whereas limbic neurons did not. Interestingly, limbic-projecting neurons had comparable firing rates
to AC neurons recorded in the first data set (Table S2 versus
Table S1). However, visual-projecting neurons had different
firing rates than SC neurons recorded earlier in the study.
This may have been related to visual-projecting neurons being
recorded from more caudal parts of the TRN (Figure 1 versus
Figure 4).

The Impact of TRN on Cognitive Function
The reduction in firing rate observed for sensory TRN neurons
during the task window in which attentional demands were highest suggests the engagement of these neurons in attentional
state modulation. It is important to note that this modulation is
probably distinct from the role of TRN in selective attention
shown by studies in primates (McAlonan et al., 2008), which
have revealed a correlation between neural responses and
task accuracy, rather than speed. Our task has examined TRN
involvement in the behavioral state preceding stimulus detection. Because mice perform this task with high accuracy, their
variability in performance is seen mostly in latency, which is likely
to reflect variability in attentional state (a form of arousal), rather
Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 815

Figure 5. Intact TRN Microcircuit Dissection Connects Form to Function
(A and B) (A) Visual-tagged neurons are positively correlated to cortical spindle power in SWS (p < 10À8, signed-rank test), but (B) anterior-tagged neurons are
negatively correlated (p = 0.006).
(C) Anterior-tagged neurons are wake active, whereas visual-tagged neurons are state indifferent.
(D) Visual-tagged neurons show stronger phase locking to spindle oscillations (p < 0.001, rank sum test at the trough). Shaded area is SEM.

(legend continued on next page)

816 Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

than selective attention. Our physiological results as well as optogenetic manipulations corroborate this notion, demonstrating
that a reduction in sensory TRN firing rates is required for optimal
task performance. Because neither a sensory nor motor effect
was observed in these studies, we interpret these findings to
reveal a permissive cognitive role for TRN in attentional states.
This interpretation is consistent with the role of state-dependent
cortical dynamics in accumulation of evidence required for decision making (Brunton et al., 2013; Kubanek et al., 2013).
The involvement of TRN in cognitive function offers a unique
perspective on connecting a number of concepts in neuroscience that had previously been studied separately. For example,
whereas our study examined the participation of TRN microcircuits in sleep and attentional states separately, the subnetwork
architecture of TRN may allow for flexible switching between
processing of external input and internal constructs in cognitive
tasks, facilitating selective thalamo-cortical network engagement (Roth et al., 2009). Interestingly, recent experiments in humans have shown that rapid changes in arousal measures, such
as pupil diameter, predict successful performance on cognitive
tasks requiring the use of external information to update internal
beliefs (Nassar et al., 2012). Given the state-dependent modulation of TRN neurons, these microcircuits may offer a mechanistic
link between subtle changes in arousal and cognitive performance. In addition, these subnetworks offer a mammalian
example of how the same neurons can switch their functionality
in a behaviorally relevant manner, a long-recognized attribute of
small circuits in model systems (Bargmann and Marder, 2013).
Our findings also offer a unique perspective on cognitive
dysfunction, which appears to be central to a number of neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders (Coe et al., 2012; Stefansson et al., 2014). Although inhibitory circuits have long-been
recognized to be disrupted in several of these disorders, the focus
has been on cortical interneurons (Gonzalez-Burgos and Lewis,
2012). Dissecting TRN microcircuit architecture and examining
its participation in cognitive function are first steps in understanding how its dysfunction may contribute to brain disorders. Given
the role of thalamus in regulating cortical states, it would not be surprising that its inhibitory dysfunction contributes to a number of
brain disorders (Barch and Ceaser, 2012; Fitzgerald et al., 2000).
Spindle-Related Microcircuitry
Our findings that TRN neurons associated with spindle oscillations influence thalamic sensory processing in a state-dependent fashion provide a mechanism for the link between spindles
and sleep stability (Dang-Vu et al., 2010; Wimmer et al., 2012). In
addition, they link sensory processing in sleep to that during
attentional states, which, to our knowledge, has never been

explicitly demonstrated. Spindle-associated TRN microcircuits,
controlling sensory processing across states of vigilance, may
explain the long-recognized association between spindles and
cognitive performance (Fogel and Smith, 2011) and may relate
to the association between spindles and cognitive dysfunction
in schizophrenia (Ferrarelli et al., 2010; Keshavan et al., 2011).
Relevance to Offline Processing
Could our findings be placed in a larger context of hippocampalthalamo-cortical interaction underlying online behavior versus
offline memory processing? We think yes. The hippocampus
sends monosynaptic input to cingulate and retrosplenial
cortices, areas that are connected to the anterior thalamic complex. Damage to any of these structures is known to result in
spatial memory deficits (Rolls, 2013). As such, limbic TRN activity may be permissive to offline hippocampal-thalamo-cortical
interactions evident by reduced firing rate of these neurons during SWS (Figure 5). The elevated firing of these neurons during
active wakefulness may set a higher inhibitory tone in the anterior
complex during behavioral arousal. The role of this inhibition in
shaping online processing of these neurons, and their engagement in behavior, is an open but intriguing question.
The role of hippocampus and associated limbic circuitry in
memory processing extends well beyond sleep because hippocampal-cortical interactions are required for basic cognitive tasks
requiring online encoding and retrieval of memories (Preston and
Eichenbaum, 2013). Recent findings of default mode network
engagement in these tasks suggest large network functional organization (Ward et al., 2014), in which thalamic modulation of cortical
dynamics may be necessary. The role of TRN in these large-scale
functional interactions will undoubtedly be an exciting area of
investigation, with broad basic and translational implications.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Animals
Seven 4- to 6-month-old male mice in a C57Bl6/J background were used
for the first data set (Figures 1, 2, and 3). Three VGAT-Cre mice were used
for visual thalamic optogenetic tagging, and two mice were used for anterior
thalamic optogenetic tagging (Figures 4 and 5). Four VGAT-Cre mice were
used for the optogenetic-activation experiments, and four others were used
for the optogenetic inhibition (Figure 6). A total of seven VGAT-Cre mice
were used for histology experiments (Figure S1). All research involving mice
has been conducted according to the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. All procedures were approved by the IACUC.
Electrophysiological Recording
Following recovery, each animal was connected to two 16-channel preamplifier headstages or a single, custom-made 32-channel preamplifier headstage

(E) Visual-, but not anterior-, tagged neurons exhibit enhanced pairwise spike time synchrony in SWS (p values, signed-rank test; numbers of axes denote
Z scores).
(F) Visual detection task design ensures control over psychophysical parameters. The mouse is informed of a new trial by a white noise stimulus emitted from two
side speakers. To initiate a trial, the mouse is required to hold its snout in a nose poke for a period of 0.5–0.7 s, ensuring that when the 0.5 s stimulus is presented at
one of the reward nose pokes, the head is in the correct orientation to see it. The rotating disk ensures that the reward sites are only available following the
stimulus, minimizing impulsive poking behavior.
(G) Only visual-tagged neurons show a reduction in firing rate (group mean ± SEM; p < 0.001, rank sum test) during the attentional window of the visual detection
task (yellow bar indicates stimulus).
See also Table S2.

Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 817

(legend on next page)

818 Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

redishlab.neuroscience.umn.edu/mclust/MClust.html), based on spike amplitudes and energies on the two electrodes of each stereotrode. Units were
separated by hand, and cross-correlation and autocorrelation analyses were
used to confirm unit separation.

Figure 7. Cartoon Depiction of State-Dependent Thalamic Inhibition
During active wakefulness, inhibition in sensory and limbic thalamic nuclei is
balanced. As the brain transitions to SWS, synchrony among sensory TRN
neurons results in enhanced inhibition of sensory thalamic nuclei contributing
to gating of external input. The reduction in firing rate of limbic-connected
neurons is likely to result in reduced inhibition in limbic thalamus, perhaps
facilitating offline processing. During attentional states, sensory neuronal firing
rate is reduced, contributing to enhanced sensory thalamic engagement in
processing of external stimuli. Although limbic thalamic neurons do not show
an overall change in firing rate during these states, individual neurons may
participate in shaping limbic processing during these states.

(Neuralynx). All data were recorded using a Neuralynx DigiLynx recording system. Signals from each stereotrode were amplified, filtered between 0.1 Hz
and 9 kHz, and digitized at approximately 30 kHz. Local field potentials
(LFPs) were collected from a single channel on each stereotrode. The LFP
and EEG traces were amplified and filtered between 0.1 Hz and 30 kHz. The
EEG was acquired as a referential signal between the ipsilateral frontal lead
(at approximately anteroposterior [A/P], +0.5 mm; mediolateral [M/L],
0.5 mm; and dorsoventral [D/V], 0.1–0.2 mm, directed at cingulate) and cerebellar reference. For experiments involving the tagging of visual neurons, the
EEG was a referential signal between primary visual cortex and the cerebellum.
Stereotrodes were slowly lowered (over several days) in 125–250 mm steps.
Spike sorting was performed offline using the MClust toolbox (http://

Virus Injections
For anatomical-tracing experiments, AAV-hSyn-DIO-EGFP (serotype 2) was
injected at multiple volumes (200 nl–1 ml) into thalamus of VGAT-Cre animals
(A/P, À0.6 to À1.0 mm; M/L, 0.9 mm; and D/V, À3.5 mm) unilaterally. Animals
were allowed to recover for at least 3 weeks for optimal virus expression, after
which they were prepared for histological experiments.
For optogenetic manipulation experiments, AAV-EF1a-DIO-ChR2-EYFP
and AAV-EF1a-DIO-eNpHR3.0-EYFP (all serotype 2) were used. These viruses
were produced by the vector core at University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
with titers around 1012 VG/ml. Viruses (250–350 nl) were injected bilaterally into
TRN of VGAT-Cre mice (A/P, À0.6 mm; ±M/L, 0.9 mm; and D/V, À3.5 mm)
using a quintessential stereotactic injector (Stoelting; #53311). Mice were allowed to recover for 2–4 weeks following injection to allow for virus expression.
For retrograde histological tracing and optogenetic-tagging experiments (Figures 5 and S5), pseudotyped RG-LVs were used. Visually connected TRN neurons were labeled through virus injections (0.5–0.8 ml) into visual thalamus (AP,
À2.1 mm; ML, 2 mm; and DV, 2.5 mm), whereas anterior thalamic-connected
TRN neurons were targeted through injections into the anterior complex
(AP, À0.7 mm; ML, 0.65 mm; and DV, À2.6 mm). RG-LV contained the EF1a
promoter, followed by a double-flox cassette in which the floxed gene (in
reverse orientation) was EGFP, channelrhodopsin (ChR2), or halorhodopsin
(eNpHR3.0) and was followed by the woodchuck posttranscriptional regulatory element (WPRE). All vectors were modified from the original lentivector
pFCGW. For production of the viral vector, the expression plasmid along
with two helper plasmids, D8.9 and FuG-B2 (a chimeric envelope protein
composed of the extracellular and transmembrane domains of RG and the
cytoplasmic domain of VSV-G; pCAGGS-FuG-B2 [a gift from Kazuto Kobayashi, Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima]), were transfected into human
embryonic kidney 293T cells with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Viral particles were collected from the cell culture medium, pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 65,000 3 g (m/s2) for 2.5 hr, resuspended in PBS, washed, and
concentrated using Amicon Ultra 4. Titers were between 108 and 109 VG/ml.
Mice were allowed 4–6 weeks of recovery following surgery to allow for retrograde virus expression.
Online Optogenetic Tagging of TRN Units
A fiber-optic patch cord (Doric Lenses) delivered light from a 473 nm laser
(Opto Engine) to the fiber-optic connector on the animal’s implant. Prior to

Figure 6. Bidirectional Manipulation of Cognitive Performance by Selective TRN Targeting
(A) Schematic showing strategy for rendering the TRN optically sensitive. The TRN of a VGAT-Cre mouse is bilaterally injected with an AAV containing a doublefloxed optogenetic molecule cassette (in this example ChR2-EYFP), which is flipped into frame only in Cre-expressing neurons. Because thalamic relay nuclei are
largely devoid of VGAT-expressing neurons (except for LGN, which is sufficiently far away from the injection site), ChR2-EYFP expression is limited to the TRN. A
similar strategy is used for eNpHR3.0-EYFP experiments (F–H).
(B) Left: two PSTHs of a TRN unit and a thalamic unit in response to a 50 Hz laser stimulus (2 ms pulse duration, 1 s duration), showing broad elevation in spiking for
the TRN unit and broad suppression of spiking in the thalamic unit. Right panel is a timeline of optogenetic stimulation regimes in relation to task phases. The same
strategy is adopted for optogenetic inhibition.
(C and D) Examples of a selective TRN stimulation session carried out during all task phases (C) or avoiding the initiation phase, but of similar length, ‘‘control
stimulation’’ (D). Note the increased number of long-latency trials in the task stimulation but not the control one: black circle indicates left correct trial, black
square indicates right correct trial, red circle indicates left incorrect trial, red square indicates right incorrect trial, and green cross indicates catch trials; laser trials
are highlighted in blue.
(E) Cumulative distribution of trial latencies (to collect reward) from individual mice, showing diminished performance following TRN activation during the task in all
four mice.
(F and G) Example sessions for eNpHR3.0-mediated TRN inhibition as in (C) and (D).
(H) Cumulative distribution of trial latencies from individual mice in response to TRN inhibition in the task, showing the opposite behavioral effect to stimulation.
(I) Setup for subnetwork-specific optogenetic manipulations.
(J) Optogenetic activation and inhibition of TRN subnetwork projecting to visual thalamus diminish and enhance performance, respectively, whereas similar
manipulations of the anterior-projecting TRN have an opposite but nonsignificant effect (n = 6 sessions, two mice for each manipulation; p values were obtained
from signed-rank tests). Error bars are SEM.
See also Figure S6 and Movies S1 and S2.

Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 819

connecting to the animal, laser power was measured and titrated to $10 mW
using a neutral density filter (Thorlabs). Power at the tip of the implanted fiber
was $50% of this value, based on measurements prior to surgery. Thus, there
was 4–5 mW of power at the fiber tip or 140–180 mW/mm for a 200 mm fiber. An
analog stimulus generator was used to control laser pulses of 10 ms duration
and 0.01 Hz frequency. See Extended Experimental Procedures for more
information.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, six
figures, two tables, and two movies and can be found with this article online
at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.025.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
M.M.H. conceived and designed all aspects of the study and collected data.
M.M.H. and Z.C. analyzed the electrophysiological and behavioral data. Z.C.
developed computational methods for data analysis. R.D.W. and P.M.B.
developed the attentional task. R.D.W. collected data for the optogenetic
tagging experiments. S.Z. and F.W. provided retrograde viruses. B.Z. developed and adapted quantitative structural connectivity methods and provided
input on their inclusion in the manuscript. E.N.B. provided input and oversight
on statistical analysis. M.A.W. supervised the study. M.M.H. wrote the paper
with input from M.A.W.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank L. Acsady and T. Fellin for helpful comments, as well as all members
of the M.A.W. laboratory. M.M.H. is supported by an NIH pathway to independence career award (K99 NS 078115) from the NINDS and a NARSAD Young
Investigator Award. Z.C. is supported by an NSF-CRCNS grant (award IIS1307645) and an Early Career Award (Mathematical Biosciences Institute).
B.Z. is supported by grants from NIMH (R01MH101209 and R01MH057414)
and NSF (CELEST and SBE-0354378). F.W. is supported by NIH grants
(R01NS077986 and DP1MH103908). E.N.B. and M.A.W. are supported by a
transformative R01 award (TR01-GM10498). M.A.W. is additionally supported
by NIH grant R01-MH061976.
Received: March 5, 2014
Revised: May 22, 2014
Accepted: June 6, 2014
Published: August 14, 2014
REFERENCES
Barch, D.M., and Ceaser, A. (2012). Cognition in schizophrenia: core psychological and neural mechanisms. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16, 27–34.
Bargmann, C.I., and Marder, E. (2013). From the connectome to brain function.
Nat. Methods 10, 483–490.

Buzsa´ki, G. (2010). Neural syntax: cell assemblies, synapsembles, and
readers. Neuron 68, 362–385.
Cardin, J.A., Carle´n, M., Meletis, K., Knoblich, U., Zhang, F., Deisseroth, K.,
Tsai, L.H., and Moore, C.I. (2009). Driving fast-spiking cells induces gamma
rhythm and controls sensory responses. Nature 459, 663–667.
Coe, B.P., Girirajan, S., and Eichler, E.E. (2012). The genetic variability and
commonality of neurodevelopmental disease. Am. J. Med. Genet. C. Semin.
Med. Genet. 160C, 118–129.
Contreras, D., Curro´ Dossi, R., and Steriade, M. (1993). Electrophysiological
properties of cat reticular thalamic neurones in vivo. J. Physiol. 470, 273–294.
Cornwall, J., Cooper, J.D., and Phillipson, O.T. (1990). Projections to the rostral
reticular thalamic nucleus in the rat. Exp. Brain Res. 80, 157–171.
Crick, F. (1984). Function of the thalamic reticular complex: the searchlight hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81, 4586–4590.
Cueni, L., Canepari, M., Luja´n, R., Emmenegger, Y., Watanabe, M., Bond, C.T.,
Franken, P., Adelman, J.P., and Lu¨thi, A. (2008). T-type Ca2+ channels, SK2
channels and SERCAs gate sleep-related oscillations in thalamic dendrites.
Nat. Neurosci. 11, 683–692.
Dang-Vu, T.T., McKinney, S.M., Buxton, O.M., Solet, J.M., and Ellenbogen,
J.M. (2010). Spontaneous brain rhythms predict sleep stability in the face of
noise. Curr. Biol. 20, R626–R627.
Deisseroth, K., and Schnitzer, M.J. (2013). Engineering approaches to illuminating brain structure and dynamics. Neuron 80, 568–577.
Desimone, R., and Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of selective visual
attention. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 193–222.
Diekelmann, S., and Born, J. (2010). The memory function of sleep. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 114–126.
Eschenko, O., Mo¨lle, M., Born, J., and Sara, S.J. (2006). Elevated sleep spindle
density after learning or after retrieval in rats. J. Neurosci. 26, 12914–12920.
Espinosa, F., Torres-Vega, M.A., Marks, G.A., and Joho, R.H. (2008). Ablation
of Kv3.1 and Kv3.3 potassium channels disrupts thalamocortical oscillations
in vitro and in vivo. J. Neurosci. 28, 5570–5581.
Fenno, L., Yizhar, O., and Deisseroth, K. (2011). The development and application of optogenetics. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 34, 389–412.
Ferrarelli, F., Peterson, M.J., Sarasso, S., Riedner, B.A., Murphy, M.J., Benca,
R.M., Bria, P., Kalin, N.H., and Tononi, G. (2010). Thalamic dysfunction in
schizophrenia suggested by whole-night deficits in slow and fast spindles.
Am. J. Psychiatry 167, 1339–1348.
Fitzgerald, K.D., Moore, G.J., Paulson, L.A., Stewart, C.M., and Rosenberg,
D.R. (2000). Proton spectroscopic imaging of the thalamus in treatment-naive
pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 47, 174–182.
Fogel, S.M., and Smith, C.T. (2011). The function of the sleep spindle: a physiological index of intelligence and a mechanism for sleep-dependent memory
consolidation. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 35, 1154–1165.

Bazhenov, M., Timofeev, I., Steriade, M., and Sejnowski, T. (2000). Spikingbursting activity in the thalamic reticular nucleus initiates sequences of spindle
oscillations in thalamic networks. J. Neurophysiol. 84, 1076–1087.

Fox, M.D., Snyder, A.Z., Vincent, J.L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D.C., and
Raichle, M.E. (2005). The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic,
anticorrelated functional networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 9673–
9678.

Boyden, E.S., Zhang, F., Bamberg, E., Nagel, G., and Deisseroth, K. (2005).
Millisecond-timescale, genetically targeted optical control of neural activity.
Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1263–1268.

Gardner, R.J., Hughes, S.W., and Jones, M.W. (2013). Differential spike timing
and phase dynamics of reticular thalamic and prefrontal cortical neuronal populations during sleep spindles. J. Neurosci. 33, 18469–18480.

Briggs, F., Mangun, G.R., and Usrey, W.M. (2013). Attention enhances synaptic
efficacy and the signal-to-noise ratio in neural circuits. Nature 499, 476–480.

Gonzalez-Burgos, G., and Lewis, D.A. (2012). NMDA receptor hypofunction,
parvalbumin-positive neurons, and cortical gamma oscillations in schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull. 38, 950–957.

Brunton, B.W., Botvinick, M.M., and Brody, C.D. (2013). Rats and humans can
optimally accumulate evidence for decision-making. Science 340, 95–98.
Buckner, R.L., and Krienen, F.M. (2013). The evolution of distributed association networks in the human brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 648–665.

Hahn, T.T., McFarland, J.M., Berberich, S., Sakmann, B., and Mehta, M.R.
(2012). Spontaneous persistent activity in entorhinal cortex modulates cortico-hippocampal interaction in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 1531–1538.

Buschman, T.J., and Miller, E.K. (2007). Top-down versus bottom-up control
of attention in the prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices. Science 315,
1860–1862.

Halassa, M.M., Siegle, J.H., Ritt, J.T., Ting, J.T., Feng, G., and Moore, C.I.
(2011). Selective optical drive of thalamic reticular nucleus generates thalamic
bursts and cortical spindles. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1118–1120.

820 Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

Huguenard, J.R., and McCormick, D.A. (2007). Thalamic synchrony and dynamic regulation of global forebrain oscillations. Trends Neurosci. 30,
350–356.

Roth, J.K., Johnson, M.K., Raye, C.L., and Constable, R.T. (2009). Similar and
dissociable mechanisms for attention to internal versus external information.
Neuroimage 48, 601–608.

Issa, E.B., and Wang, X. (2011). Altered neural responses to sounds in primate
primary auditory cortex during slow-wave sleep. J. Neurosci. 31, 2965–2973.

Royer, S., Zemelman, B.V., Losonczy, A., Kim, J., Chance, F., Magee, J.C.,
and Buzsa´ki, G. (2012). Control of timing, rate and bursts of hippocampal place
cells by dendritic and somatic inhibition. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 769–775.

Ji, D., and Wilson, M.A. (2007). Coordinated memory replay in the visual cortex
and hippocampus during sleep. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 100–107.
Jones, E.G. (1981). Functional subdivision and synaptic organization of the
mammalian thalamus. Int. Rev. Physiol. 25, 173–245.
Jones, E.G. (2002). Thalamic organization and function after Cajal. Prog. Brain
Res. 136, 333–357.
Kahn, J.B., Ward, R.D., Kahn, L.W., Rudy, N.M., Kandel, E.R., Balsam, P.D.,
and Simpson, E.H. (2012). Medial prefrontal lesions in mice impair sustained
attention but spare maintenance of information in working memory. Learn.
Mem. 19, 513–517.
Karlsson, M.P., and Frank, L.M. (2009). Awake replay of remote experiences in
the hippocampus. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 913–918.
Keshavan, M.S., Montrose, D.M., Miewald, J.M., and Jindal, R.D. (2011). Sleep
correlates of cognition in early course psychotic disorders. Schizophr. Res.
131, 231–234.
Kimura, A., Yokoi, I., Imbe, H., Donishi, T., and Kaneoke, Y. (2012). Distinctions
in burst spiking between thalamic reticular nucleus cells projecting to the dorsal lateral geniculate and lateral posterior nuclei in the anesthetized rat. Neuroscience 226, 208–226.
Koch, C. (1993). Computational approaches to cognition: the bottom-up view.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 3, 203–208.
Kubanek, J., Snyder, L.H., Brunton, B.W., Brody, C.D., and Schalk, G. (2013).
A low-frequency oscillatory neural signal in humans encodes a developing decision variable. Neuroimage 83, 795–808.
Livingstone, M.S., and Hubel, D.H. (1981). Effects of sleep and arousal on the
processing of visual information in the cat. Nature 291, 554–561.

Saalmann, Y.B., Pinsk, M.A., Wang, L., Li, X., and Kastner, S. (2012). The pulvinar regulates information transmission between cortical areas based on
attention demands. Science 337, 753–756.
Spreng, R.N., Stevens, W.D., Chamberlain, J.P., Gilmore, A.W., and Schacter,
D.L. (2010). Default network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control
network, supports goal-directed cognition. Neuroimage 53, 303–317.
Stefansson, H., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Steinberg, S., Magnusdottir, B.,
Morgen, K., Arnarsdottir, S., Bjornsdottir, G., Walters, G.B., Jonsdottir, G.A.,
Doyle, O.M., et al. (2014). CNVs conferring risk of autism or schizophrenia
affect cognition in controls. Nature 505, 361–366.
Steriade, M., and Llina´s, R.R. (1988). The functional states of the thalamus and
the associated neuronal interplay. Physiol. Rev. 68, 649–742.
Steriade, M., Domich, L., and Oakson, G. (1986). Reticularis thalami neurons
revisited: activity changes during shifts in states of vigilance. J. Neurosci. 6,
68–81.
Steriade, M., Nun˜ez, A., and Amzica, F. (1993). A novel slow (< 1 Hz) oscillation
of neocortical neurons in vivo: depolarizing and hyperpolarizing components.
J. Neurosci. 13, 3252–3265.
Tye, K.M., Prakash, R., Kim, S.Y., Fenno, L.E., Grosenick, L., Zarabi, H.,
Thompson, K.R., Gradinaru, V., Ramakrishnan, C., and Deisseroth, K.
(2011). Amygdala circuitry mediating reversible and bidirectional control of
anxiety. Nature 471, 358–362.

Llina´s, R.R., and Steriade, M. (2006). Bursting of thalamic neurons and states
of vigilance. J. Neurophysiol. 95, 3297–3308.

Vaingankar, V., Sanchez Soto, C., Wang, X., Sommer, F.T., and Hirsch, J.A.
(2012). Neurons in the thalamic reticular nucleus are selective for diverse
and complex visual features. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 6, 118.

Magnin, M., Rey, M., Bastuji, H., Guillemant, P., Mauguie`re, F., and GarciaLarrea, L. (2010). Thalamic deactivation at sleep onset precedes that of the cerebral cortex in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 3829–3833.

Vong, L., Ye, C., Yang, Z., Choi, B., Chua, S., Jr., and Lowell, B.B. (2011). Leptin action on GABAergic neurons prevents obesity and reduces inhibitory tone
to POMC neurons. Neuron 71, 142–154.

Marks, G.A., and Roffwarg, H.P. (1993). Spontaneous activity in the thalamic
reticular nucleus during the sleep/wake cycle of the freely-moving rat. Brain
Res. 623, 241–248.

Vyazovskiy, V.V., Olcese, U., Lazimy, Y.M., Faraguna, U., Esser, S.K., Williams, J.C., Cirelli, C., and Tononi, G. (2009). Cortical firing and sleep homeostasis. Neuron 63, 865–878.

Marlinski, V., Sirota, M.G., and Beloozerova, I.N. (2012). Differential gating of
thalamocortical signals by reticular nucleus of thalamus during locomotion.
J. Neurosci. 32, 15823–15836.
McAlonan, K., Cavanaugh, J., and Wurtz, R.H. (2008). Guarding the gateway to
cortex with attention in visual thalamus. Nature 456, 391–394.
Miller, E.K., and Buschman, T.J. (2013). Cortical circuits for the control of
attention. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 23, 216–222.
Nassar, M.R., Rumsey, K.M., Wilson, R.C., Parikh, K., Heasly, B., and Gold, J.I.
(2012). Rational regulation of learning dynamics by pupil-linked arousal systems. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 1040–1046.
Pinault, D. (2004). The thalamic reticular nucleus: structure, function and
concept. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 46, 1–31.

Ward, A.M., Schultz, A.P., Huijbers, W., Van Dijk, K.R., Hedden, T., and Sperling, R.A. (2014). The parahippocampal gyrus links the default-mode cortical
network with the medial temporal lobe memory system. Hum. Brain Mapp.
35, 1061–1073.
Weyand, T.G., Boudreaux, M., and Guido, W. (2001). Burst and tonic response
modes in thalamic neurons during sleep and wakefulness. J. Neurophysiol. 85,
1107–1118.
Wimmer, R.D., Astori, S., Bond, C.T., Rovo´, Z., Chatton, J.Y., Adelman, J.P.,
Franken, P., and Lu¨thi, A. (2012). Sustaining sleep spindles through enhanced
SK2-channel activity consolidates sleep and elevates arousal threshold.
J. Neurosci. 32, 13917–13928.

Preston, A.R., and Eichenbaum, H. (2013). Interplay of hippocampus and prefrontal cortex in memory. Curr. Biol. 23, R764–R773.

Yu, X.J., Xu, X.X., He, S., and He, J. (2009). Change detection by thalamic reticular neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1165–1170.

Rolls, E.T. (2013). Limbic systems for emotion and for memory, but no single
limbic system. Cortex. Published online December 24, 2013. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.cortex.2013.12.005.

Zikopoulos, B., and Barbas, H. (2012). Pathways for emotions and attention
converge on the thalamic reticular nucleus in primates. J. Neurosci. 32,
5338–5350.

Cell 158, 808–821, August 14, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc. 821

