REVIEW

R.W. Guillery et al. – Thalamic reticular organization

Paying attention to the thalamic reticular
nucleus
R.W. Guillery, S.L. Feig and D.A. Lozsádi
The thalamic reticular nucleus can be divided into a number of sectors, each concerned with a
different function (sight, touch, hearing, movement or ‘limbic’ functions). Each sector is connected
to more than one thalamic nucleus and to more than one cortical area, and each sector has
topographically mapped connections with the thalamus and the cortex. We consider the known
details of these connections and show: (1) that they are not the same for each sector; (2) that the
reticular nucleus serves as a nexus, where several functionally related cortical areas and thalamic
nuclei can interact, modifying thalamocortical transmission through the inhibitory connections
that go from the reticular cells to thalamic relay cells; and (3) that we need much more detailed
information about these highly organized connections before we can understand exactly how
the thalamic reticular nucleus might be influencing thalamocortical pathways in attentional
mechanisms or in other, as yet undefined, roles.
Trends Neurosci. (1998) 21, 28–32

T

R.W. Guillery and
S.L. Feig are at the
Dept of Anatomy,
University of
Wisconsin School
of Medicine, 1300
University Avenue,
Madison,
WI 53706, USA.
D.A. Lozsádi is at
the Dept of
Human Anatomy,
South Parks Road,
Oxford,
UK OX1 3QX.

28

HE THALAMIC RETICULAR NUCLEUS (TRN) forms
an essential part of the circuits that link the thalamus to the cerebral cortex. Although these circuits have
been implicated in attentional mechanisms1, their functional role in the transmission of information through
the thalamus to the cerebral cortex is still largely undefined. The reticular nucleus lies like a shield between
thalamus and cortex (Fig. 1), so that all of the fibers
passing either way between thalamus and cortex must
go through the TRN. This gives the nucleus the structure of a sieve rather than a real shield. Many of the
fibers that go through the TRN give off side branches
to supply excitatory, glutamatergic synapses to the
cells of TRN and these cells, in turn, send inhibitory,
GABAergic fibers back to the thalamus2,3. The basic
circuit, shown in Fig. 1, can be seen as crucial in the
control of messages reaching the cerebral cortex.
In this review we present evidence that the topographic
organization of connections with cortex and thalamus
within TRN is important in the control of thalamocortical circuits. We suggest that each of the major
thalamocortical systems has its own characteristic pattern of organization in TRN, a pattern that probably relates to the functional properties of that system. That
is, understanding the different organizational patterns
within TRN might show how each part of TRN can act
upon all or just a part of its related thalamocortical
pathways.
The TRN was long regarded as a diffusely organized
structure, having global rather than localized actions
on thalamocortical pathways4,5. However, there is now
evidence that the nucleus is divided into several distinct
sectors, each related to a particular functional group of
thalamocortical pathways2, and that in each of the sectors there is a topographically ordered representation
of relevant cortical areas and thalamic nuclei6–14. Visual,
auditory, somatosensory and motor sectors can be recognized in the TRN, as well as separate sectors for other
nuclei like the anterior and mediodorsal thalamic
TINS Vol. 21, No. 1, 1998

nuclei; and for each sector the topography of cortical
and thalamic connections is beginning to be defined.
The afferents to TRN from thalamus and cortex,
together with those from brainstem and basal forebrain
(see Fig. 1; Refs 15,16), play a critical role in controlling
the firing patterns of thalamocortical relay cells, which
can be in either a ‘tonic’ or a ‘burst’ mode17,18. In the
tonic mode, there is a relatively unmodified, linear
information transfer through the thalamic relay from
ascending pathways to cortex. The burst mode has been
characteristically seen during sleep or epileptic discharges5
and has therefore been considered to be a global mechanism that prevents the relay of information to cortex.
However, recent observations show that even in the
burst mode the thalamocortical relay cells can respond
to sensory stimuli19,20. Although this transmission is
non-linear, the afferent activity is transmitted to cortex
and, perhaps most significantly, the signal-to-noise ratio
is higher than in the tonic mode. That is, in the burst
mode the system is primed to react to changes in input
activity rather than to transfer this activity reliably to
cortex for analysis. For the latter, the system needs to
switch to the tonic mode and it appears that this
switch can occur in animals that are awake21.
Thus, two features have recently been added to our
knowledge of thalamo-reticular circuits: one is the
capacity of the thalamic cells, when in the burst mode,
to respond to novel activity patterns and then change to
the tonic mode so that the new stimuli can be accurately transferred to the cortex; the other is the localization of connections to and from topographically welldefined parts of TRN. Together they provide a basis on
which the thalamo-reticular circuitry can respond to
specific, localized, active parts of the environment or
other brain centers. This is in contrast to the seemingly
more global action of afferents that come from the brainstem. We are here concerned with the topographically
organized connections that allow a highlighting of
limited parts of thalamo-reticular circuits and can be

Copyright © 1998, Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. 0166 - 2236/98/$19.00

PII: S0166-2236(97)01157-0

REVIEW

R.W. Guillery et al. – Thalamic reticular organization

closely related to Crick’s ‘searchlight hypothesis’ about
TRN action in attention1. Whatever functions will
eventually be assigned to the reticular nucleus, and
there might be more than one, the topographic order
seen in its connections, and its consequent capacity to
focus on limited parts of the environment or of other
brain parts, are likely to play key roles.

Cortex
TRN

Multiple inputs to single sectors of TRN
For any single functional thalamocortical pathway
and its related TRN sector, there is usually more than
one connected thalamic nucleus or cortical area. Thus,
visual, auditory and somatosensory systems have
many cortical areas22–24 and more than one related
thalamic nucleus connected to TRN (Refs 6,9–12). The
way in which several thalamocortical circuits relate to
each other in TRN must be crucial to the influence
that any one cortical area can exert on the modulation
going from a TRN sector back to any one of the related
thalamic nuclei, and then on to cortex.
Figure 2 uses the visual system as an example to
show that thalamic nuclei and their associated cortical
and reticular connections can be categorized as either
first order or higher order25. The lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) is a first-order nucleus. It receives primary,
functional driving afferents from retina (green in Fig. 2),
and sends to primary visual cortex (V1). The pulvinar,
in contrast, is a higher-order nucleus. It receives primary
driving afferents from the cerebral cortex (green), specifically from branches of descending axons of layer-5
pyramidal cells26–28 and sends to peristriate cortex. Both
first-order and higher-order nuclei receive modulatory
afferents (orange) from cells in layer 6 of their related
cortical areas27–29, and these are the afferents that send
collaterals to TRN (Ref. 27). In contrast, thalamocortical fibers from layer 5 innervating the higher-order
nucleus have no direct input to TRN (Ref. 27), and in
this they resemble the ascending afferent fibers2,15.
For the auditory pathways, the pars ventralis of the
medial geniculate nucleus (MGv) is a first-order relay
to cortical area A1 (Refs 2,10) and for the somatosensory pathways it is the ventrobasal nucleus (VB)
(Refs 2,12), which sends to cortical area S1. Parts of the
dorsal division of the medial geniculate nucleus (MGm)
can be regarded as a higher-order relay to secondary
auditory areas11,30,31. For the somatosensory system,
the medial division of the posterior group (POm) can
be seen as a higher-order relay9,10,27,32, connecting to the
second somatosensory area (S2). Detailed studies might
show that some or all of these higher-order relays have
some first-order ascending connections, but the important point for the present is that there are different
sorts of circuits going through TRN: some are primarily
first-order circuits driven by ascending afferents, others
are higher-order circuits driven by descending afferents
from layer 5 of cortex. Current evidence suggests that
the relationship of these circuits within TRN is not the
same for each sector. The visual, somatosensory and
auditory sectors appear to receive strikingly different
connectional patterns, and so do the rostral parts of
TRN that relate to motor thalamus, anterior and mediodorsal thalamic nuclei, and to the midline and intralaminar nuclei. These will each be considered in turn.

The visual sector
There is evidence for visuotopic connections to TRN
for rabbit, Galago and rat6,11,33–35. Each has two parts to
the visual sector: an outer or lateral tier occupies about

Thalamus

Ascending Brain stem Basal
afferents afferents forebrain
afferents

6 5 4

Fig. 1. The major connections between thalamic relay cells (blue),
cells of the thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN; red) and the cerebral
cortex (orange). Cortical layers 4, 5 and 6 are indicated by numbers.

two-thirds of the thickness of TRN and receives first
order afferents from cortical area 17 (V1) and from LGN.
Within this outer tier, each small area of V1 or small
column of geniculate gives origin to reticular terminals
that form a narrow slab in the plane of the TRN (Figs
3,4). The horizontal meridian is represented perpendicular to the thickness of the nucleus, peripheral
vision at the outer border of the nucleus and central

Cortex
TRN

Thalamus

HO

FO

Ascending Brain stem Basal
afferents afferents forebrain
afferents

6 5 4
Corticofugal

Fig. 2. Some thalamic nuclei, called ‘first-order’ (FO) nuclei, receive
their main ‘driving’ afferents (green) from ascending specific afferents, whereas others, the ‘higher-order’ (HO) nuclei, receive their
main (green) driving afferents from layer 5 of the cerebral cortex.
Note that both FO and HO nuclei receive modulatory afferents from
layer 6 of the cortex, and that these corticothalamic cells (orange) as
well as the thalamocortical cells (blue) send branches to TRN, whereas
the primary afferents (green) whether coming from cortex or from
ascending pathways send no branches to TRN.

TINS Vol. 21, No. 1, 1998

29

REVIEW

R.W. Guillery et al. – Thalamic reticular organization

Whereas the two tiers have relatively well-defined
borders, the slabs do not. Slabs are revealed only when
connections from small cortical areas or thalamic volumes are labelled, and the larger the area that is labelled,
the larger the slab. Therefore one cannot ask about the
size of a slab, or see how slabs relate to individual TRN
cells. However, in the main part of TRN (including the
visual, auditory, somatosensory and motor sectors)
cells have discoid dendritic arbors, with the dendrites
stretched parallel to the slabs (Figs 3,5)12,37. The relationship of reticular cells to axons that contribute to the
slabs is important, but currently undefined.
The tier forming the inner third of the visual sector receives higher-order afferents from extrastriate visual areas
and from the pulvinar. The inner and outer representations in TRN could be mirror reversals of each other
about the vertical meridian, but the topography of the
higher-order projections to the inner tier is still in question. Conley and Diamond11 have suggested that the
inner tier lacks any topographic organization. It is clear
that for all three species there are two distinct tiers in the
reticular nucleus, an outer one relating to first-order circuits, and an inner one connected to higher-order circuits.

The somatosensory sector
The somatosensory sector has been studied in cat, rat
and rabbit7,9,12,27. This sector appears to have a single tier
in cat and rabbit7–9, but in the rat there is evidence for
two tiers, an outer first-order tier and an inner higherorder tier12,27, as seen in the visual sector (Fig. 4B). The
first-order circuits have topographically organized reticular connections, leg representations connect to the outer
parts of TRN, face areas to the inner parts, and arm in
between. Higher-order circuits are established with S2
vision at the junction of the outer and inner tiers. Move- and POm. In TRN S2 matches the topography of S1, but
ments upward in the visual field are represented by it appears that the topography of the connections with
movements dorsally in the sector. The cells within any POm is less accurate or absent9,12,27. Single reticular cells
one slab send their axons to the part of the lateral gen- can send axon branches to both VB (mapped) and to
iculate nucleus from which they receive their afferents. POm (unmapped, or poorly mapped); these branched
axons might be less common in rat
than cat9,12, possibly because of a
Cortex
Cortex
B
C
greater separation of the first- and
higher-order connections in the rat.
FO
FO

Fig. 3. A small area of visual cortex (V1 or V2 in bottom left), which
receives from a corresponding small area of the visual field, relates
to a single column in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN)
(bottom right) and to a slab within either the outer tier of the thalamic reticular nucleus, as shown here for V1, or to the inner tier, for
V2 (top). The dendritic arbor of the reticular cells tends to match the
shape of the slabs (see Fig. 5). From Mitrofanis and Guillery36 (based
on data from Crabtree and Killackey6).

,,,
,,
,,,
,,
,,,
,,,,,,,
,,,,,,
yy
,,
,,,
,,,
,,, ,,,,,
yy
,,,
A

Cortex

FO

The auditory sector

TRN

TRN

TRN

Thalamus

Thalamus

Thalamus

HO

HO

FO

HO

FO

HO

Visual

FO

HO

Somatosensory

HO

Auditory

Fig. 4. The different relationships established by visual (A), somatosensory (B) and auditory (C) pathways in the
thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN). Note that the three sectors of the reticular nucleus illustrated in the figure occupy
different parts of TRN. The somatosensory sector lies rostral to the visual sector, and the auditory sector lies in the
ventral and caudal parts of TRN. (A) First-order pathways are shown in red for the thalamus and as horizontal lines
for the cortex. Higher-order pathways are shown in purple for thalamus and as vertical lines for cortex. Within the TRN
one can see two distinct tiers, a larger outer tier receiving from first order thalamus and cortex, and smaller inner tier,
receiving from higher order thalamus and cortex. Tiers are defined as subdivisions of a reticular sector having connections to different cortical areas or different thalamic nuclei, or both. Tiers are distinct from slabs: slabs represent a subdivision of the reticular nucleus relating to a part of any one cortical area or thalamic nucleus. Slabs are experimentally
definable and have no functionally recognizable boundaries. (B) Only a single tier can be recognized in the somatosensory sector of the thalamic reticular nucleus of cat and rabbit. Both first-order (yellow) and higher-order (blue) thalamic
relays project to this single sector, which is shown as green. The cortical areas, again shown as horizontal and vertical
lines, show complete overlap in the reticular nucleus. Connections in the rat resemble those shown in A and are not illustrated. (C) Three tiers can be recognized in the auditory sector of the TRN. A central tier receives from the first order
nucleus (brown) and from a part of the first-order cortex (horizontal stripes). Inner and outer tiers receive from higherorder thalamus (black) and from parts of first-order cortex (horizontal stripes), and from the whole of higher-order
cortex (vertical stripes).

30

TINS Vol. 21, No. 1, 1998

Evidence about the auditory sector
is based on studies in Galago11 and
show a more complex relationship
between first- and higher-order
circuits. Essentially three distinct
tiers are recognizable in this sector
(Fig. 4C). First-order afferents from
thalamic nucleus MGv form topographically organized slabs in the
middle tier. Higher-order afferents
from thalamic nucleus MGm and
cortical area A2 distribute to the
outer and inner tiers, forming a
U-shaped surround to the middle
tier. They show no evidence for
topographic order. The first-order
afferents from area A1 do show
a topographical order but, surprisingly, extend across all three
tiers. At present, evidence about
auditory connections of TRN is
available only for Galago, where we
know relatively little about functional maps in thalamus or cortex.

REVIEW

R.W. Guillery et al. – Thalamic reticular organization

Comparisons with other species should prove especially
valuable.

The anterior parts of the reticular nucleus
The anterior parts of the reticular nucleus include a
motor sector connected topographically to motor cortex
and ventrolateral thalamic nucleus in rat and monkey14,38. In the monkey there is evidence for slabs from
motor cortex, but connections to other motor areas
remain to be defined. The most rostral pole of TRN has
topographically mapped connections to limbic cortex
and to the anterior thalamic nuclei in the rat13,39.
These can be regarded as first-order circuits that are
driven from the mamillothalamic tract. They show no
slabs, suggesting that there are some different organizational principles in this region. Higher-order circuits
are represented by connections to the laterodorsal and
mediodorsal nuclei, and possibly by connections to
the midline and intralaminar nuclei40. A single reticular cell can send axonal arbors to lateralis dorsalis and
anterodorsalis (D. Pinault and M. Deschnes, pers.
commun.), perhaps comparable to the dual projection
described for the somatosensory sector. The reticular
connections of these important parts of thalamocortical pathways, dealing with higher functions of frontal
and limbic cortex, are still largely undefined and merit
detailed study. They are likely to illuminate the way in
which the relevant cortical areas relate to each other.

Functional implications
At present, evidence on details of reticular connections is incomplete. One reason for writing this article
is to stress the importance of defining the connections.
It is clear that no simple general rule governing cortical
and thalamic connections in TRN applies to all sectors.
Each sector appears to follow distinct rules. To understand how any one sector responds to its several inputs
and then produces modulatory effects in the thalamus,
we have to look at its particular pattern of organization.
A clue to understanding reticular connectivity could
perhaps be seen in the visual sector, on the basis of the
special importance of central vision. In TRN this is
where the first- and higher-order pathways are immediately adjacent to each other, so that there is likely
to be some interaction between the two pathways for
central vision. In contrast to this, the somatosensory
systems of cat and rabbit have nothing that corresponds
to central vision: the parts of the body are treated as
more or less equivalent, and first- and higher-order pathways interact in all parts of TRN in approximately the
same way. The rat, with its large vibrissal input, might
treat this more like an area centralis, showing some of the
reduplication around a sensory focus that characterizes
the visual pathways. The auditory sector is perhaps
the most puzzling. One would have expected a correspondence between the representations from first-order
MGv and A1, because there is a topographically organized projection from MGv to A1. Instead there would
appear to be a central portion of A1 that relates to the
first-order thalamic inputs, and two outer sectors of A1
relating to higher-order thalamic inputs. We do not know
what particular aspects of auditory function are mapped
in the connections that have been described for Galago,
but it is reasonable to look for local differences in the
properties of cortical area A1 that do not correspond to
anything seen in the medial geniculate nucleus. There is
evidence in species other than Galago of a non-uniform
distribution of properties such as bandwidth values,

Fig. 5. Cell from the thalamic reticular nucleus, filled with biocytin to show the dendritic
arbor and the axonal terminals in the ventrobasal nucleus. From Pinault et al.12 PO, posterior
group; TR, thalamic reticular nucleus; VB, ventrobasal complex.

frequency scatter and threshold scatter, which all show
minima for a central part of cortical area A1 (Ref. 41).
These variables have not been defined for Galago, and
it is likely that studies of reticular connections in cat
or primate, where more is known about thalamic and
cortical auditory functions, will help to clarify the
significance of the connections.
We suggest that details of connectivity in each sector
of TRN merit close attention because they will reveal how
the parts of any one group of thalamocortical pathways,
whether implicated in attentional mechanisms42, or in
other mechanisms that have yet to be defined, interact to
control thalamocortical transmission in related thalamic
relays. We need to know the topographical relations
of first- and higher-order pathways in each sector, and we
also need to understand the details of their synaptic
organization within TRN. How do thalamic and cortical
afferents relate to individual reticular cells? There is
evidence that thalamic fibers have larger terminals ending closer to the reticular cell body than do cortical fibres
(Ref. 3 and D. Lozsádi and R. Guillery, unpublished observations), but whether or not this pattern is common
to all of TRN and is the same for first- and higher-order
circuits is undefined. The extent to which reticular
dendrites cross the boundaries of tiers has not been
defined, nor do we know how the oriented arbors of
reticular cells relate to small or large slabs. The specificity and complexity of the inputs to individual
reticular cells still remains to be studied, as do details
of possible connections between cells in TRN (Ref. 43).

Concluding remarks
The organization of TRN involves the interaction of
several thalamocortical circuits for each functionally
TINS Vol. 21, No. 1, 1998

31

REVIEW

R.W. Guillery et al. – Thalamic reticular organization

distinct sector of TRN. We have discussed two cortical
areas and two thalamic nuclei for each sector, but generally more cortical areas and more thalamic nuclei are
involved in any one sector. The important point is that
each sector provides a nexus for the interaction of several
thalamocortical and corticothalamic circuits, and will
prove to be a key site where many cortical areas concerned with one modality can interact. The nature of
interactions in this nexus is likely to prove crucial for
the cortical and reticular control of relay properties of
thalamic cells as these switch from one mode of firing
to another, possibly changing as attentional foci shift
across cortical areas and within cortical areas. It has
recently been shown that the pattern of thalamic
reticular connections to the auditory thalamus of the
cat resembles that of the somatosensory pathways in
this species44. However, the cortical connections in the
auditory sector of the cat have not yet been defined.
Selected references

Acknowledgements
This work was
supported by grants
from the Wellcome
Trust and the NIH
(EY11494). We
thank Dr D. Pinault
for a critical reading
of the manuscript.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Crick, F. (1984) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 81, 4586–4590
Jones, E.G. (1985) The Thalamus, Plenum Press
Ohara, P.T. and Lieberman, A.R. (1985) J. Neurocytol. 14, 365–411
Scheibel, M.E. and Scheibel, A.B. (1966) Brain Res. 1, 43–62
Steriade, M. et al. (1993) Science 262, 679–685
Crabtree, J.W. and Killackey H.P. (1989) Eur. J. Neurosci. 1,
94–109
Crabtree, J.W. (1992) Eur. J. Neurosci. 4, 1343–1351
Crabtree, J.W. (1992) Eur. J. Neurosci. 4, 1352–1361
Crabtree, J.W. (1996) J. Comp. Neurol. 366, 207–222
Conley, M. et al. (1991) Eur. J. Neurosci. 3, 1089–1103
Conley, M. and Diamond, I.T. (1990) Eur. J. Neurosci. 2, 211–226
Pinault, D. et al. (1995) Eur. J. Neurosci. 7, 31–40
Lozsádi, D.A. (1995) J. Comp. Neurol. 358, 233–246
Künzle, H. (1976) Brain Res. 105, 253–267

15 Sherman, S.M. and Guillery, R.W. (1996) J. Neurophysiol. 76,
1367–1395
16 McCormick, D. (1992) Prog. Neurobiol. 39, 337–388
17 Jahnsen, H. and Llinás, R. (1984) J. Physiol. 349, 227–247
18 McCormick, D.A. and Feeser, H.R. (1990) Neuroscience 39,
103–113
19 Guido, W. et al. (1995) Visual Neurosci. 12, 723–741
20 Mukherjee, P. and Kaplan, E. (1995) J. Neurophysiol. 74,
1222–1243
21 Guido, W. and Weyand, T. (1995) J. Neurophysiol. 74, 1782–1786
22 Van Essen, D.C. and Maunsell, J.H.R. (1983) Trends Neurosci. 6,
370–375
23 Brugge, J.F. (1985) Cerebral Cortex (Peters, A. and Jones, E.G.,
eds), pp. 229–271, Plenum Press
24 Kaas, J.H. (1996) J. Comp. Neurol. 366, 109–133
25 Guillery, R.W. (1995) J. Anat. 187, 583–592
26 Abramson, B.P. and Chalupa, L.M. (1985) Neuroscience 15, 81–95
27 Bourassa, J. et al. (1995) Eur. J. Neurosci. 7, 19–30
28 Bourassa, J. and Deschnes, M. (1995) Neuroscience 66, 253–263
29 Gilbert, C.D. and Kelly, J.P. (1975) J. Physiol. 268, 391–421
30 Ojima, H. (1994) Cerebral Cortex 4, 646–663
31 Rouiller, E.M. and Welker, E. (1991) Hearing Res. 56, 179–190
32 Hoogland, P.V. et al. (1991) Exp. Brain Res. 87, 159–172
33 Lozsádi, D.A. et al. (1996) Eur. J. Neurosci. 8, 2416–2427
34 Coleman, K.A. and Mitrofanis, J. (1996) Eur. J. Neurosci. 8,
388–404
35 Harting, J.K. et al. (1991) J. Comp. Neurol. 310, 411–427
36 Mitrofanis, J. and Guillery, R.W. (1993) Trends Neurosci. 16,
240–245
37 Ohara, P.T. and Havton, L.A. (1996) Brain Res. 731, 236–240
38 Cicirata, S. et al. (1990) Exp. Brain Res. 79, 325–337
39 Gonzalo-Ruiz, A. and Lieberman, A.R. (1995) Brain Res. Bull.
37, 17–35
40 Kolmac, C.I. and Mitrofanis, J. (1997) J. Comp. Neurol. 377,
165–178
41 Schreiner, C.E. (1995) Curr. Opinion Neurobiol. 5, 489–496
42 Posner, M.I. and Petersen, S.E. (1990) Ann. Rev. Neurosci. 13,
25–42
43 Pinault, D. et al. (1997) J. Neurosci. 17, 3215–3233
44 Crabtree, J. J. Comp. Neurol. (in press)

Physiological aspects of information
processing in the basal ganglia of normal
and parkinsonian primates
Hagai Bergman, Ariela Feingold, Asaph Nini, Aeyal Raz, Hamutal Slovin, Moshe Abeles
and Eilon Vaadia

Hagai Bergman,
Ariela Feingold,
Asaph Nini, Aeyal
Raz, Hamutal
Slovin, Moshe
Abeles and Eilon
Vaadia are at the
Dept of Physiology
and the Center for
Neural
Computation, The
Hebrew University
– Hadassah
Medical School,
PO Box 12272,
Jerusalem 91120,
Israel.

32

There are two views as to the character of basal-ganglia processing – processing by segregated
parallel circuits or by information sharing. To distinguish between these views, we studied the
simultaneous activity of neurons in the output stage of the basal ganglia with cross-correlation
techniques. The firing of neurons in the globus pallidus of normal monkeys is almost always
uncorrelated. However, after dopamine depletion and induction of parkinsonism by treatment
with 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), oscillatory activity appeared and the
firing of many neurons became correlated. We conclude that the normal dopaminergic system
supports segregation of the functional subcircuits of the basal ganglia, and that a breakdown of this
independent processing is a hallmark of Parkinson’s disease.
Trends Neurosci. (1998) 21, 32–38

A

LTHOUGH THE CRUCIAL ROLE played by the basal
ganglia in the pathogenesis of various movement
disorders such as Parkinson’s and Huntington’s diseases
has been known for many years1,2, the basic mechanisms
of information processing by the basal ganglia in health
TINS Vol. 21, No. 1, 1998

and disease are still under debate. Here, we first highlight the open questions on information processing by
the basal ganglia and then summarize our studies of the
simultaneous activity of several neurons in the basal
ganglia of normal and parkinsonian primates. Finally,

Copyright © 1998, Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. 0166 - 2236/98/$19.00

PII: S0166-2236(97)01151-X

