NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

NeuroImage
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w. e l s e v i e r. c o m / l o c a t e / y n i m g

The generation of rhythms within a cortical region: Analysis of a neural mass model
Mauro Ursino ⁎, Filippo Cona, Melissa Zavaglia
Department of Electronics, Computer Science and Systems, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 28 July 2009
Revised 18 December 2009
Accepted 21 December 2009
Available online 4 January 2010
Keywords:
EEG rhythms
Connectivity
Neural mass models
GABAA,fast inhibitory interneurons
Power spectral density

a b s t r a c t
Rhythms in brain electrical activity are assumed to play a signiﬁcant role in many cognitive and perceptual
processes. It is thus of great value to analyze these rhythms and their mutual relationships in large scale
models of cortical regions. In the present work, we modiﬁed the neural mass model by Wendling et al. (Eur. J.
Neurosci. 15 (2002) 1499–1508) by including a new inhibitory self-loop among GABAA,fast interneurons. A
theoretical analysis was performed to demonstrate that, thanks to this loop, GABAA,fast interneurons can
produce a γ rhythm in the power spectral density (PSD) even without the participation of the other neural
populations. Then, the model of a whole cortical region, built upon four interconnected neural populations
(pyramidal cells, excitatory, GABAA,slow and GABAA,fast interneurons) was investigated by changing the
internal connectivity parameters. Results show that different rhythm combinations (β and γ, α and γ, or a
wide spectrum) can be obtained within the same region by simply altering connectivity values, without the
need to change synaptic kinetics. Finally, two or three cortical regions were connected by using different
topologies of long range connections. Results show that long-range connections directed from pyramidal
neurons to GABAA,fast interneurons are the most efﬁcient to transmit rhythms from one region to another. In
this way, PSD with three or four peaks can be obtained using simple connectivity patterns. The model can be
of value to gain a deeper insight into the mechanisms involved in the generation of γ rhythms and provide a
better understanding of cortical EEG spectra.
© 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Analysis of brain activity at a mesoscopic scale (from a millimeter
to several centimeters of the cortex) reveals the presence of
synchronous oscillations, which cover a large spectrum of frequencies
and can be detected using EEG, MEG or ECoG (Buzsàki, 2006). It is
generally assumed that these oscillations are not merely an
epiphenomenon, but play a crucial role in many important processes
of the cortex, especially involving association among different
functions (Basar et al., 2000, 2001; Ward, 2003). The study of brain
rhythms, in turn, of their etiology and functional role is strictly
connected with the estimation of effective connectivity among brain
regions. Rhythms originating in one region, in fact, may be
transmitted to other regions via long range excitatory connections,
and this “system of rhythms” may serve important functions to
associate information from one region to another, to detect the phase
of events, or to drive synaptic plasticity, thus playing a pivotal role in
learning and memory (Basar et al., 2000, 2001; Engel and Singer,
2001; Ward, 2003).
One way to improve our knowledge of this “system of rhythms,”
and to investigate the correlated problem of effective cortical

⁎ Corresponding author. Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informatica e Sistemistica, viale
Risorgimento 2, I-40136 Bologna, Italy. Fax: +39 051 2093073.
E-mail address: mauro.ursino@unibo.it (M. Ursino).
1053-8119/$ – see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.084

connectivity, is through the use of dynamical mathematical models.
In particular, a discipline named neurodynamics aims at analyzing the
operations of the brain by investigating (via mathematical models and
signal processing techniques) the dynamical aspects of electric or
magnetic brain activity (Freeman, 1975; Nunez, 1995).
Mathematical models used to study brain dynamics can be roughly
subdivided into two main classes, each with its virtues and drawbacks. In a ﬁrst class of models, the activity of individual neurons is
described in detail (generally using spiking neurons) and the
properties of ionic channels, axons and dendrites often incorporated
explicitly (Maex and De, 2007; Traub et al., 2005; Wang and Buzsaki,
1996). Although these models are of the greatest value to understand
the basic mechanisms of neural dynamics at a microscopic scale (for
instance, to investigate mechanisms causing oscillations in a network
of neurons), they are too cumbersome and computationally onerous
to analyze the behavior of entire cortical regions at a mesoscopic level.
Much attention in recent years has been devoted to the so-called
“neural mass models” (NMMs), ﬁrst introduced by Wilson and Cowan
(1972), Freeman (Freeman, 1978), and Lopes da Silva et al. (1974) in
the mid-seventies. In these models, the dynamics of entire neural
populations and of their synapses are described using just a few state
variables (i.e., a few differential equations) under the assumption that
neurons in the same population share similar inputs and synchronize
their activity. Besides a smaller computational complexity, these
models offer a more parsimonious description of neural dynamics in
terms of parameters and mechanisms involved, generally ascribing

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

rhythm generation to feedback loops between excitatory and
inhibitory neural populations. One of the ﬁrst models of this type is
the Wilson-Cowan oscillator, which is still largely used today to study
synchronization among neural oscillations (Wilson and Cowan,
1972). Lopes da Silva et al. (1974) proposed a simple model of two
populations in feedback (one excitatory and the other inhibitory) to
simulate the generation of the α rhythm in the thalamus. Freeman
proposed a similar model to study dynamics in the olfactory cortex
(Freeman, 1978). These models have been subsequently improved by
Jansen et al. (1993) and Jansen and Rit (1995): their model
encompasses the interaction between three neural populations with
different synaptic kinetics (pyramidal neurons, excitatory interneurons, inhibitory interneurons), as it occurs in a single cortical column.
The Jansen equations are frequently used today to build models of
interconnected cortical areas devoted to the analysis of EEG dynamics
in large regions of the brain (David and Friston, 2003), to study
effective connectivity from EEG or fMRI data (Babajani and SoltanianZadeh, 2006) or to investigate how event related potentials (ERPs)
depend on intrinsic connectivity (David et al., 2005). The group of
Friston (Friston, 2005; Kiebel et al., 2008) developed a mathematical
formalism, named Dynamic Causal Modeling (DCM), to provide a
theoretical framework for the study of brain dynamics: it uses some
variations of the Jansen model to characterize dynamics in cortical
regions, together with a Bayesian approach for parameter estimation
from data. Others (Babajani and Soltanian-Zadeh, 2006) used neural
mass models to link data obtained from metabolic imaging (PET or
fMRI) and electromagnetic signals (EEG or MEG). Sotero et al. (2007)
developed a model of the overall cortical dynamics (still based on a
variation of the Jansen model) to investigate how the distribution of
brain rhythms on the cortex may depend on effective connectivity
among the ROIs (regions of interest). Their model includes 71 brain
areas with anatomical connectivity matrices among these areas.
Models for the analysis of EEG at a mesoscopic scale were formulated
by Wright, Robinson, and Rowe et al. in a series of papers from the
mid-nineties (Rennie et al., 2002; Robinson et al., 2001; Wright et al.,
2003). Although these models use a continuum in space instead of
discrete neural populations, they share many aspects with neural
mass models; in particular they exploit a few equations to summarize
neural dynamics.
An important advancement in the use of neural mass models was
provided by Wendling et al. (2002). Studying hippocampal dynamics
during epilepsy, they proposed the addition of a fourth population to
the Jansen model to account for the presence of GABAA interneurons
with fast synaptic kinetics (White et al., 2000). With this model, they
were able to simulate the dynamics of real EEG signals measured with
intracerebral electrodes in the hippocampus during the transition
from interictal to fast ictal activity. Recently, the Wendling model was
used by Ursino and Zavaglia et al. to simulate the multimodal power
spectral density in cortical regions (Zavaglia et al., 2006, 2008) and to
assess cortical connectivity via parameter estimation techniques
(Cona et al., 2009; Ursino et al., 2007) during simple motor tasks. In
particular, these studies stress the importance of fast inhibitory
interneurons in the genesis of power in the γ band.
Neural mass models were used by Moran et al. (2007, 2009) in a
series of recent papers to simulate spectral densities of EEG and MEG
recordings. In these last models, the authors introduced recurrent
connections among inhibitory interneurons and spike rate adaptation.
Using linearity and stationarity assumptions, they investigated how
the model's biophysical parameters (e.g., post-synaptic receptor
density and time constants) inﬂuence the cross-spectral density of
responses measured directly.
This short summary underlines the rising importance that neural
mass models are acquiring for the study of brain dynamics. Analysis of
the literature, however, and previous simulations of our group
(Ursino et al., 2007; Zavaglia et al., 2006) also reveal some important
limitations of these models. First, a single neural mass model

1081

(consisting of three (Jansen) or four (Wendling) neural populations
connected via multiple feedbacks) when stimulated with input white
noise produces just a single rhythm, with a narrow band, or, in some
cases, a wide band spectrum. This “intrinsic rhythm” may originate
either from instability of the feedback loops or, more frequently, from
noise ampliﬁcation caused by a resonance in a given frequency band
(Grimbert and Faugeras, 2006). Moreover, to produce rhythms in
different bands, these models necessitate a change in the synaptic
time constants. In particular, simulating γ rhythms in these models
requires the use of very small values for the time constant of fast
interneurons (i.e., a few ms) (Wendling et al., 2002; Zavaglia et al.,
2008). Conversely, real spectra measured during motor or cognitive
tasks often reveal the presence of multiple rhythms in the same ROI
(Rowe et al., 2004; Ursino et al., 2007; Zavaglia et al., 2006). The
simultaneous coexistence of several rhythms appears as an important
characteristic of brain dynamics, which may have important computational functions.
Hence, the following problems are “on the table.” How can we
simulate different rhythms in a single ROI within the framework of
NMMs? Are these models adequate to simulate γ oscillations, which
play an essential role in many high-level cognitive tasks?
David and Friston (2003) suggested that a multi-modal spectrum
can be obtained via NMMs by assuming the presence of different subpopulations in the same cortical region with different synaptic
kinetics (i.e., different sub-populations of pyramidal neurons, excitatory interneurons, etc…). A similar approach was followed by Ursino
et al. (2007) and Zavaglia et al. (2006) to simulate α, β and γ rhythms
in some ROIs during simple motor tasks. It is worth noting that the
same idea was implicitly followed also by Sotero et al. (2007); in fact,
these authors simulated the distribution of δ, α, β and γ rhythms
separately, which is the same as to consider four separate systems of
rhythms with distinct sub-populations of neurons. Although this
approach may be consistent with the physiological reality, it appears
not parsimonious: you need one speciﬁc population of neurons for
each rhythm you want to generate. A more parsimonious approach
was proposed by our group recently: we hypothesized that each
region can produce just one intrinsic rhythm due to its internal
dynamics, but it can receive additional rhythms from other regions via
long-range excitatory connections (Cona et al., 2009; Zavaglia et al.,
2008). With this model, one does not need to replicate too many
populations of neurons, but still needs to modify synaptic kinetics
from one region to another. However, with this model, it is still
difﬁcult to obtain more than two simultaneous rhythms in the same
ROI.
In the present work, we suggest a variation in NMMs which can
help to overcome the previous limitations, and can be of value to build
a system of interconnected rhythms among ROIs. Our variation is
based on some recent experimental and modeling results, suggesting
that γ rhythms can be generated by a network of fast inhibitory
interneurons without the participation of the other populations.
Whittington, Traub and Jefferys (Jefferys et al., 1996; Whittington
et al., 1995) numerically simulated a network of isolated inhibitory
neurons tonically excited by an external input, and showed that the
neurons tend to entrain their activity into rhythmic ﬁring at about
40 Hz thanks to reciprocal inhibition. Subsequent studies which
investigated the oscillatory behavior of large inhibitory interneuron
networks assuming slow and weak synapses (Tiesinga and Jose, 2000;
Wang and Buzsaki, 1996; White et al., 1998) conﬁrmed that these
networks can produce coherent oscillations when subject to external
excitation. Oscillations, however, appeared scarcely robust to variations in the excitatory drive. To improve robustness, one needs to
incorporate fast and strong inhibitory synapses into the network, but
in this case a stronger external excitatory drive is required to
overcome inhibition (Neltner et al., 2000). These results suggest
that fast-spiking inhibitory interneurons play a pivotal role in the
generation of γ-band oscillations (Bartos et al., 2007).

1082

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

The previous modeling results are supported by experimental
data. First, oscillations of inhibitory post-synaptic potentials at
frequencies in the γ-band occur in the hippocampal and neocortical
slices even after blockade of glutamate receptors (Jefferys et al., 1996;
Whittington et al., 1995). Basket cells are highly interconnected in the
hippocampus and in the neocortex (Bartos et al., 2007) where they
can form an extensive mutually interconnected interneuron network
(Kisvarday et al., 1993; Sik et al., 1995) with a large divergent synaptic
output to other neurons (Cobb et al., 1995).
Despite the large number of theoretical and experimental data that
stress the role of a fast inhibitory network in the genesis of γ-rhythms,
we are not aware that this mechanism is solidly incorporated into
neural mass models. Moran et al. incorporated recurrent selfconnections between inhibitory interneurons in their recent model
(Moran et al., 2007, 2008) motivating this choice with the necessity to
generate high-frequency oscillations in the γ band. However, they
used only one populations of inhibitory interneurons, without a
distinction between GABAA,fast and GABAA,slow synaptic kinetics.
According to the previous discussion, three main objectives have
been pursued in this work: (i) to enrich the NMM of a single region by
adding a new feedback loop, through which fast inhibitory interneurons can produce a γ rhythm per se (i.e., without the participation
of the other neural populations); (ii) to demonstrate that the modiﬁed
model can easily produce EEG PSD of a single region characterized by
two peaks (i.e., two activities in different bands), using a very
parsimonious description of connectivity weights and without
altering model time constants; and (iii) to demonstrate that a
model of interconnected ROIs can produce complex multimodal
spectra and that a long-range connection between two ROIs is much
more efﬁcient to transmit rhythms if it targets fast inhibitory
interneurons, rather than pyramidal neurons.
The model is ﬁrst presented in a synthetic form and the
mechanism of γ-rhythm generation analyzed (“reduced model”).
Then, the role of connectivity between populations of excitatory and
inhibitory interneurons internal to the cortical region is studied,
laying particular attention to the role of GABAA,fast interneurons
(“complete model”). Subsequently, the effect of connectivity between
two or three cortical regions is shown (“coupled complete model”).
The discussion underlines the main innovative aspects of the
proposed model.
Material and methods
A single region model: a brief summary
The model of a cortical region consists of four neural populations,
which represent pyramidal neurons, excitatory interneurons, and
inhibitory interneurons with slow and fast synaptic kinetics, respectively. Each population represents a group of neurons of the same
type, which approximately share the same membrane potential and
so can be lumped together. All populations are described with a
similar mathematical formalism, as in Fig. 1.
Brieﬂy, each population receives an average postsynaptic membrane potential (say v) from other neural populations, and converts

this membrane potential into an average density of spikes ﬁred by the
neurons. In order to account for the presence of inhibition (when
potential is below a given threshold) and saturation (when potential
is high) this conversion is simulated with a static sigmoidal
relationship. Moreover, each population sends synapses to other
populations (or, in case of pyramidal neurons, to other regions too).
Each synaptic kinetics is described with a second order system, but
with different parameter values.
Throughout the present work, we will assume a variational model,
i.e., all quantities are considered as variations with respect to a
hypothetical basal value. Moreover, this basal value is taken at the
central point of the sigmoidal relationship. As a consequence, all
quantities have zero mean value and are centered at the basal value,
assumed equal to zero. A similar assumption has been done also by
others when developing recent neural mass models (David et al.,
2005).
Of course, the use of a variational model also exhibits some
important limitations: in particular, neither the position of the
working point nor the slope of the sigmoid at the equilibrium value
varies with the connectivity parameters. This simpliﬁcation has been
adopted to maintain the model in the linear region: this choice helps
the analysis of rhythm transmission, avoiding that the equilibrium
point in some population shifts to the sub-threshold or to the
saturation region due to an excessive connectivity (see Ursino et al.,
2007, for some exempla). This limitation can be overcome in future
works, for instance by using a non-zero mean value for model inputs
(thus making the equilibrium values to depend on connectivity
parameters too).
In the following, a quantity which belongs to a neural population
will be denoted with the subscript p (pyramidal), e (excitatory
interneuron), s (slow inhibitory interneuron) and f (fast inhibitory
interneuron).
Hence, the previous concepts are summarized by the following
equations
X
vi =
Cij yj
ð2:1Þ
j

zi = Sðvi Þ =

2e0
− e0
1 + e − rvi

::
y i = Gi ωi zi − 2ωi ẏ

i¼p; e; s; f

2

i

− ωi yi

ð2:2Þ
ð2:3Þ

where the subscript j refers to a presynaptic neural population, yj is the
post-synaptic potential change induced by a unitary synapse, Cij
represent the connectivity constant from the jth population to the ith
one, and the sum in the right hand member of Eq. (2.1) extends to all
populations which make synapses to the ith population. Parameters e0
and r in Eq. (2.1), assumed equal for all populations, set the maximal
saturation and the slope of the sigmoidal relationship, while Gi and ωi
in Eq. (2.3) represent the strength and the reciprocal of the time
constant of the individual synapses. It is worth noting that, by giving
different values to Gi and ωi (i = p, e, s, f) one can mimic the impulse
responses of the different synapses (excitatory, GABAA,slow and GABAA,
fast). In the following, these impulse responses will be denoted with
symbols he(t), hs(t) and hf(t), assuming that excitatory interneurons
have the same kinetics as pyramidal cells (i.e., hp(t) = he(t)).
A network of fast inhibitory interneurons: the “reduced model”

Fig. 1. Layout of the general model of a single population.

Previous versions of neural mass models (Freeman, 1975; Jansen
and Rit, 1995; Wendling et al., 2002) assumed that each neural
population (p, e, s, f) receives its synaptic inputs from other
populations in the same region or from pyramidal neurons in other
regions. As a consequence, a neural population isolated from the
others and stimulated by white noise cannot exhibit an intrinsic
rhythm. Only connections with other populations can induce the

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

1083

presence of rhythms, due to a balance between excitation and
inhibition.
Conversely, experimental and computational results (summarized
in the Introduction) underscore that a network composed of fast
inhibitory interneurons can induce γ rhythms, even without the
presence of other neural populations. Since this mechanism may play
a signiﬁcant role in the brain, providing a clock for pyramidal cells
(Jefferys et al., 1996), we modiﬁed the description of the fast
inhibitory interneurons taking into account the possible effect of
their re-entrant connections. Indeed, basket cells (GABAergic interneurons) are highly interconnected and there is a high probability to
ﬁnd a chemical synapse between two closely placed fast-spiking
basket cells (Bartos et al., 2007).
It is worth noting that the Jansen model was already modiﬁed in
previous works with the introduction of a recurrent self-loop: for
instance, Sotero et al. (2007) introduced a self-excitatory loop for the
pyramidal population to account for the majority of intracortical ﬁbers
within a voxel; Moran et al. (2007) introduced a self-loop among
inhibitory interneurons to generate γ rhythms. However, none of
these models used GABAA,fast synapses.
The simple model of isolated fast inhibitory interneurons (named
the “reduced model”) is described in Fig. 2. Here, to have realistic
dynamics, we assumed that these interneurons synapse with
themselves (hence, we included a self-loop with impulse response
hf(t)) and are tonically excited by an external input (which may come
from populations in the same area or from other cortical areas). The
excitation is simulated with white noise (say uf(t)) with zero mean
value and variance σ2 = 5, which acts through excitatory synapses
(impulse response he(t)). The mean value of the input noise is taken
as zero, since we are working with a variational model.
A deeper comprehension of the mechanisms through which this
fast interneuron model generates a γ rhythm can be achieved via an
analytical approach, by studying the linearized model around its
critical points. The critical points are those for which the derivative of
the state vector Yf = (yf,ẏf) is zero, at the mean value of the input
(uf = 0). We can write:

one can obtain the transfer function of the linearized model in the
frequency domain:

8
vf = − Cff yf
>
>
>
>
 
>
>
>
< zf = S vf =

ωpeak is typically located in the γ band. The latter point will be
examined in section results, via a parameters sensitivity analysis on K
and ωf.

2e0
− e0
1 + e − rvf

>
>
ẏ f = 0
>
>
>
> ::
>
: y = G ω z − 2ω ẏ
f
f f f
f

ð2:4Þ

vf = 0

vf =

ð2:6Þ

where K = e2o r Cff Gf is the loop gain. It can be easily veriﬁed that if the
parameters are all positive the model is asymptotically stable. H can
be seen as the product of two transfer functions H1 and H2 such that

H1 ð jωÞ = Ge ωe

H2 ð jωÞ =

ωf + jω

2

ð ωe + jωÞ2

1


ωf K + ωf + 2ωf jω + ð jωÞ2

ð2:7Þ

ð2:8Þ

Since ωe b ωf, H1 represents a low-pass ﬁlter which attenuates highfrequencies compared with the low frequencies (the attenuation ratio
is ω e b ω f ) and so it cannot be responsible for γ frequency
ampliﬁcation. H2 is a second order low-pass ﬁlter, so its behavior is
totally described by its natural frequency ωn and its damping factor δ.
ωn =

δ=

rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ


ωf K + ωf

sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ωf
K + ωf

ð2:9Þ

ð2:10Þ

If the parameters are chosen to have physiologically plausible values
(see Results) then δb p1ﬃﬃ2. In this case, a resonance occurs at ωpeak,
where
ωpeak =

rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ


ωf K − ωf

ð2:11Þ

Model of a single cortical area: the “complete model”
f

− ω2f yf = 0

where Cff represents the strength of connections among inhibitory
interneurons.
The only solution is the origin of the phase space Yf = (0,0), so
vf = 0. The sigmoid is the only block that has to be linearized. By
replacing its expression with the ﬁrst order Taylor expansion in the
critical point:
 
AS vf 
zf =

Avf 


2
Ge ωe ωf + jω
h 

i
H ð jωÞ =
ð ωe + jωÞ2 ωf K + ωf + 2ωf jω + ð jωÞ2

e0 r
v
2 f

ð2:5Þ

In the previous section, we considered only a single population,
and so Eq. (2.11) holds only for the “reduced model.” Of course, the
activity of this gamma rhythm (and thus its frequency) changes when
interneurons are connected to other populations. To model a whole
cortical area (the “complete model,” either an overall ROI as in
Zavaglia et al. (2008), or a voxel as in Sotero et al. (2007)) we need to
connect the four populations via excitatory and inhibitory synapses,
with impulse response he(t), hs(t) or hf(t). The average numbers of
synaptic contacts among neural populations are represented by eight
parameters, Cij (see Fig. 3), where the ﬁrst subscript represents the
target (post-synaptic) population and the second subscript is the pre-

Fig. 2. Layout of the model of GABAA,fast inhibitory interneurons.

1084

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

dxp ðt Þ
2
= Ge ωe zp ðt Þ − 2ωe xp ðt Þ − ωe yp ðt Þ
dt
zp ðt Þ =

2e0
− e0
1 + e − rvp

vp ðt Þ = Cpe ye ðt Þ − Cps ys ðt Þ − Cpf yf ðt Þ

ð2:13Þ

ð2:14Þ

ð2:15Þ

Excitatory interneurons
dye ðt Þ
= xe ðt Þ
dt

ð2:16Þ

!
up ðt Þ
dxe ðt Þ
2
− 2ωe xe ðt Þ − ωe ye ðt Þ
= Ge ωe ze ðt Þ +
dt
Cpe

ð2:17Þ

ze ðt Þ =

2e0
− e0
1 + e − rve

ve ðt Þ = Cep yp ðt Þ

ð2:18Þ
ð2:19Þ

Slow inhibitory interneurons
dys ðt Þ
= xs ðt Þ
dt

ð2:20Þ

dxs ðt Þ
2
= Gs ωs zs ðt Þ − 2ωs xs ðt Þ − ωs ys ðt Þ
dt

ð2:21Þ

zs ðt Þ =
Fig. 3. Layout of the model of a single region: four neural populations (pyramidal cells,
excitatory interneurons, GABAA,slow inhibitory interneurons and GABAA,fast inhibitory
interneurons) which communicate via excitatory and inhibitory synapses. Worth
noting is the presence of a new feedback loop with gain Cff.

synaptic population. These connections agree with those proposed by
Wendling et al. (2002) but with the addition of the new self-loop Cff.
An important aspect of the model is the external inputs. Since
inputs originate from pyramidal neurons in other cortical areas, in the
following we will assume that they always act via excitatory synapses
(hence, with impulse response he(t)). In previous works (Ursino et al.,
2007; Zavaglia et al., 2008), we assumed that inputs target pyramidal
cells. However, lateral connections in the cortex target all layers
(Felleman and van Essen, 1991), hence inputs can actually reach both
pyramidal cells and excitatory interneurons as well as inhibitory
interneurons (David et al., 2005). For brevity, in the following, we will
consider only inputs to pyramidal neurons and to fast inhibitory
interneurons. A parameters sensitivity analysis has been performed
also on inputs to slow inhibitory and excitatory interneurons, but is
not reported since it did not produce appreciable changes in model
dynamics. This aspect will be further analyzed in the Discussion
section.
In conclusion, compared with the model described in our previous
work (Zavaglia et al., 2008), the new “complete model” has two
changes: (i) fast inhibitory interneurons may receive an external
input (say uf(t)) from pyramidal neurons of other populations and (ii)
fast inhibitory interneurons exhibit a negative self-loop, i.e., they not
only inhibit pyramidal neurons (as in Wendling model), but also
inhibit themselves. The ﬁnal model is displayed in Fig. 3. It
corresponds to the following set of differential equations:
Pyramidal neurons
dyp ðt Þ
= xp ðt Þ
dt

ð2:12Þ

2e0
− e0
1 + e − rvs

vs ðt Þ = Csp yp ðt Þ

ð2:22Þ
ð2:23Þ

Fast inhibitory interneurons
dyf ðt Þ
= xf ðt Þ
dt

ð2:24Þ

dxf ðt Þ
2
= Gf ωf zf ðt Þ − 2ωf xf ðt Þ − ωf yf ðt Þ
dt

ð2:25Þ

dyl ðt Þ
= xl ðt Þ
dt

ð2:26Þ

dxl ðt Þ
2
= Ge ωe uf ðt Þ − 2ωe xl ðt Þ − ωe yl ðt Þ
dt

ð2:27Þ

zf ðt Þ =

2e0
− e0
1 + e − rvf

vf ðt Þ = Cfp yp ðt Þ − Cfs ys ðt Þ − Cff yf ðt Þ + yl ðt Þ

ð2:28Þ
ð2:29Þ

It is worth noting that we used a sigmoidal function centered at zero,
which corresponds to the use of a variational model.
Model of connectivity among areas: the “coupled complete model”
In order to study long-range connectivity, let us consider two
cortical areas (each described via Eqs. (2.12–2.29)), which are
interconnected through long-range excitatory connections with a
time delay. The presynaptic and postsynaptic regions will be denoted
with the superscript k and h, respectively. The generalization to more
than two regions is trivial. To simulate connectivity, we assumed that
the average spike density of pyramidal neurons of the presynaptic
area (zkp) affects the target region via a weight factor, Whk
j (where j = p
or f, depending on whether the synapse target to pyramidal neurons
or fast inhibitory interneurons) and a time delay of 10 ms, T. This is

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

1085

achieved by modifying the input quantities uhp and/or uhf of the target
region.
Hence, we can write
h

h

hk k

uj ðt Þ = nj ðt Þ + Wj zp ðt − T Þ

j = p; f

ð2:30Þ

nj(t) represents Gaussian white noise (in the present work: mean
value mj = 0 and variance σ2j = 5) which account for all other external
inputs not included in the model.
Results
Parameters sensitivity analysis on the population of GABAA,fast
interneurons (“reduced model”)
Fig. 4 shows the results of a parameters sensitivity analysis
performed on Cff and ωf in Eq. (2.8). The analysis has been performed
both with the linearized model described in the A single region
model: a brief summary section (linearized solution) and the
nonlinear model (Eq. (2.4), z, numerical solution). The left panels
(a, c and e) show the square amplitude of the transfer function of the
linearized model; the right panels (b, d and f) show a comparison
between the linearized model (dashed line) and the output of the
nonlinear model (continuous line); the latter has been computed,
after numerical integration of the differential equations, as the PSD of
the output divided by the PSD of the input uf. The curves have been
computed using three different values of parameters ωf and Cff (see
Eq. 2.10).
As suggested by the theoretical study on the linearized model, the
parameters sensitivity analysis conﬁrms that the system has a
resonance peak whose position can be changed within the frequency
range of the γ-band (30–50 Hz) by acting on the two parameters. As a
consequence, the input noise is ampliﬁed in correspondence of this
peak and GABAA,fast interneurons exhibit an oscillatory activity in the
γ band. Hence, GABAA,fast neurons can generate γ activity even if
isolated from the other populations, thanks to the self-loop included
in the model.
Parameters sensitivity analysis on a cortical area (“complete model”)
Simulations performed in a previous paper (Zavaglia et al., 2006)
demonstrate that the model of Wendling et al. (2002), stimulated
with input white noise to pyramidal cells (up (t)), produces just a
unimodal spectrum (i.e., a spectrum with a single well deﬁned peak)
whose position primarily depends on the synaptic kinetics (i.e., ωe,
ωs, ωf) parameters. Conversely, the model presented here (Fig. 3),
including a self-loop between fast inhibitory interneurons, can
generate more than one oscillatory rhythm within a single ROI.
An example is shown in Fig. 5a. Two rhythms are evident in the
PSD, one in the β range and the other in the γ range. The parameters
values used in the simulations are reported in Table 1 (Jansen and Rit,
1995). We used a value for the time constants of GABAA,fast
interneurons of 13 ms, which is in accordance with in-vivo studies
(White et al., 2000).
Generation of γ-band power
In order to identify the loops that are essential to obtain a rhythm
in the γ band, we performed a parameters sensitivity analysis on the
six gains which describe the strength of the connections among the
four neural populations. In particular, the PSD was computed by
assigning a value zero to each gain, while the other ﬁve gains are
maintained at the basal value. The results show that, when
connections from pyramidal cells toward excitatory interneurons
(Cep) or from GABAA,slow interneurons toward pyramidal cells (Cps) are
set to 0 (Figs. 5b and c), the two rhythms persist. When the connection
from pyramidal cells toward GABAA,fast interneurons (Cfp) is set to 0,

Fig. 4. Comparison between the analytical and numerical solutions obtained with the
model of a single loop of GABAA,fast interneurons. For each row, different values of ωf
(respectively 40 s− 1, 70 s− 1 and 100 s− 1, panel a) and Cff (respectively 27, 54 and 81,
panel b) have been used.

the two rhythms are not clearly distinguishable, but the power band is
still fairly broad (0–40 Hz) (Fig. 5d). Conversely, when the connection
from GABAA,slow interneurons toward GABAA,fast interneurons (Cfs) is
cut (Fig. 5e), the two rhythms collapse in a single one oscillating in the
γ band. Instead, when the connections from GABAA,fast interneurons to
pyramidal cells (Cpf) or from GABAA,fast interneurons toward themselves (Cff) are cut (Figs. 5f and g), the two rhythms collapse in a single
one located at low frequencies, suggesting a crucial role for these
connections in the generation of γ rhythm.
The previous simulations show that the presence of fast inhibitory
interneurons with a self-loop is essential to generate a γ rhythm
within a single region. However, these simulations were just

1086

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

Fig. 5. PSD of a single region setting off some connections among neural populations.
The ﬁrst panel represents the output of the whole model with parameters as in Table l.
The other six panels represent the power spectra respectively when Cep = 0, Cps = 0,
Cfp = 0, Cfs = 0, Cpf = 0, Cff = 0.

performed according to an ON/OFF criterion, i.e., by individually
eliminating the contribution of single connectivity weights.
Hence, we performed a more exhaustive analysis on the whole
connectivity parameter space. Here, simulations have been performed
by systematically varying the seven parameters which represent the
internal connectivity (except Cff). For each parameter, we used six
different values within a physiological range (0, 27, 54, 81, 108, 135),
while the other parameters (ωe, ωs, ωf, Ge, Gs, Gf) were maintained at
the values reported in Table 1. Hence, the total number of points
probed in the parameter space (D) was 67 = 279936.
For each parameter set, three simulations have been performed:
one for the Wendling model, another for the new model, and the last
for a control model, that is, a model equal to Wendling model plus the
white noise input for the GABAA,fast interneurons. The control model
has been analyzed to verify that the differences between the model by
Wendling and the new one are actually due to the GABAA,fast loop.
For each model and for each parameter set, we computed the PSDs.
The ﬁrst analysis was devoted to ascertain the possibility to
generate a signiﬁcant power in the γ band by each model. To this end,

for each parameter value, and for each model, we computed: (i) an
upper frequency for the spectrum, deﬁned as the frequency below
which 95% of power is contained; (ii) an average frequency for the
spectrum, deﬁned as the frequency below which the spectrum
contains 50% of its power. Results are presented in Fig. 6, in the
form of a histogram showing the percentage of results for each
frequency range. Results show that 95% of the power for Wendling's
model and for the control model is always located between 0 and
25 Hz, whereas for a high percentage of simulations the new model
shows signiﬁcant power activation also in the γ band (Fig. 6a).
Moreover for about 1/4 of the simulations, the new model generates
half of the power at frequencies higher than 25 Hz (panel b). This
means that the new model not only can generate γ activity, but it is
also suitable for the generation of power spectral peaks in the γ band.
These results clearly demonstrate that only if Cff ≠ 0, we can
produce an evident γ rhythm using physiological values for time
constants, further supporting the importance of the new loop.
A further set of simulations has been performed by systematically
varying parameter Cff (i.e., strength of the inhibitory interneurons fast
loop) from 0 to 236.25, while all other parameters are set at the same
value as in Table 1. Results, not shown for briefness, demonstrate that
the frequency of the second peak in the spectrum progressively
increases from 30–40 Hz to 100–120 Hz by increasing Cff, although at
high values of this parameter the amplitude of the γ peak signiﬁcantly
decreases.
Bimodal spectra
A subsequent analysis was devoted to ascertain the possibility of
generating two distinct peaks in PSD. This point has been handled by
studying the transfer function of the linearized system (LS) around its

Table 1
Model basal parameters.
Parameter

Symbol

Value

Average gains (mV)

Ge
Gs
Gf
ωe
ωs
ωf
Cep
Cpe
Csp
Cps
Cfp
Cfs
Cpf
Cff
e0
r
T

5.17
4.45
57.1
75
30
75
54
54
54
67.5
54
27
540
27
2.5
0.56
10

Time constants reciprocals (s− 1)

Numbers of synaptic contacts

Sigmoid saturation (s− 1)
Sigmoid steepness (mV− 1)
Time delay (ms)

Fig. 6. Panel a shows a histogram of the power distribution obtained with the model by
Wendling (dashed line), with the new model (continuous line) and with the control
model (marked line). For each frequency f, the ﬁgure indicates the percentage of
simulations in the parameters space D for which 95% of the power is below f. Similarly,
panel b indicates the percentage of simulations in the parameters space D for which
50% of the power is below f. See text for details (Parameters sensitivity analysis on a
cortical area (“complete model”)).

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

equilibrium points. For each set of parameters, the equilibrium points
have been calculated and the stability evaluated (Hartman-Grobman
theorem) looking at the real part of eigenvalues. About 25% of the
parameter sets gives at least one stable LS for the model by Wendling,
while this percentage rises to about 54% for the new model. Among
the stable LSs, we looked for those that could generate at least two
distinct resonance peaks. To this end, the 8th degree polynomial at the
denominator of the transfer function has been factorized in four 2nd
degree polynomials DENi(s) = (s − pi,1)(s − pi,2). Every DENi(s) block
can generate a resonance if it has two complex conjugate poles that
verify the following constraints:
Re(pi) b 0, Re(pi) N −|Im(pi)| (damppﬃﬃﬃ
ing factor less than 1 = 2). Results show that these constraints are
veriﬁed in about 12% of the simulations in the new model, but just in
0.04% (118 sets of parameters) in the model by Wendling. Hence, the
new model is much more suitable to produce two distinct resonance
peaks than the former one. Finally, we further looked for those
resonance peaks which are at least 10 Hz apart from one another, and
which exhibit a damping factor δ b 0.1: these last stricter constraints
ensure the presence of two well evident peaks in the spectra. An
example for the new model when the latter constraints are satisﬁed is
shown in Fig. 7. However, these conditions are limited (less than 1% of
the simulations) even in the new model. Most conditions characterized by two well deﬁned peaks in the spectra are associated with
unstable equilibrium points, i.e., the development of limit cycle
dynamics. The latter analysis may be the subject of future work.
Role of time constants
A last set of simulations has been performed to show the role of the
time constant of fast synaptic kinetics. To this end, PSD has been
computed in the three models using the values of connectivity
strength reported in Table 1, and progressively reducing the time
constant τf from 13 to 1 ms. Results, shown in Fig. 8, conﬁrm that the

Fig. 7. Example of a bimodal spectrum generated with the new model. Panel a shows
the squared modulus of the transfer function (continuous line) of the associated
linearized system around a stable equilibrium point. Panel b shows the squared
modulus of the transfer function computed as the PSD of the numerical solution of the
model divided by the PSD of the input noise (dashed line). In panel b the continuous
line represents the same plot as in panel a.

1087

Fig. 8. Power spectra of the model by Wendling (dashed line), of the new model
(continuous line) and of the control model (marked line), when the time constant of
GABAA,fast interneurons is changing. The values of the other parameters are from Table 1.

present model can produce a signiﬁcant power in the γ band for all
values of τf. If τf is reduced down to 1 ms, a broadband spectrum can
be observed. Conversely, Wendling model and the control model can
produce signiﬁcant power in the γ band only if the time constant used
for fast synaptic kinetics is as low as 1–2 ms.
Connectivity between two cortical areas (“coupled complete model”)
Further simulations were performed to study the transmission of
rhythms from one region to another as a consequence of connectivity
with time delay between the two regions. In these simulations,
parameters were given so that populations exhibit limit-cycle
behavior (i.e., oscillations arise as the consequence of internal
instability), to emphasize rhythm generation and transmission (see
also the analysis in section 3.2).
Fig. 9 shows the behavior of a model composed of two
interconnected regions. In each panel, the ﬁrst two columns represent
the PSD of the two regions; the third is the coherence function while
the fourth column represents the connectivity diagram. In all
simulations, parameter Cpf is set to 540 in the ﬁrst region, whereas
it is set to 108 in the second one. All other parameters have the same
values as in Table 1. As a consequence of these choices, the ﬁrst region
exhibits two rhythms (the ﬁrst in the β and the second in the high γ
range) while the second region exhibits only one narrow rhythm in
the low γ range. The results of different simulations are shown, with
the connectivity strength from the second to the ﬁrst region
progressively increased. Moreover, the connectivity was directed
either to fast inhibitory interneurons, to pyramidal neurons, or to
both. The most interesting result is that if the connectivity is sent
toward pyramidal cells the rhythm is not induced in the target region
and also the coherence function is low (panels d–f and m–o), whereas
if the connectivity is sent to GABAA,fast interneurons, the presence of a
new induced peak is evident (panels g–l) and the ﬁrst region exhibits
three simultaneous rhythms.
Fig. 10 shows another example of connection between two
regions. In these simulations, the parameter Cpf of the second region
has been set to 0 in order to obtain a rhythm around 5 Hz. This region
could simulate an area which oscillates at low frequency, for example
the thalamus. It is worth noting that, if the connections are sent to
GABAA,fast interneurons, the ﬁrst region exhibits three rhythms, with
one in the θ band (5 Hz) induced by the second region. This behavior
is reﬂected in the coherence function.
Fig. 11 shows the effect of connectivity among three regions. All
the regions are simulated with the parameters reported in Table 1, but
the ﬁrst region has Cpf = 0 to reproduce the activity of an area with a
rhythm in the θ band and the third region has Cpf = 108 to reproduce

1088

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

Fig. 9. PSD of two regions (ﬁrst region in the ﬁrst column (panels a, d, g, j, m) and second region in the second column (panels b, e, h, k, n)) communicating by different connectivity
patterns. The coherence between the two regions is represented in the third column (panels c, f, i, l, o); the connectivity patterns are represented in the fourth column. The arrow
indicates connectivity toward pyramidal cells, the square indicates connectivity toward GABAA,fast interneurons. See the text for other parameters values.

the activity of an area which oscillates in the γ range. It is worth
noting that in this case the PSD of the second region exhibits a
multiple spectrum (with intrinsic and induced rhythms), comprehensive of the contributions from all the regions. The coherence is
high in correspondence of the induced rhythms.
Of course, real connections in the cortex often exhibit feedback
loops. A comprehensive study of all the possible combinations of
connectivity patterns among two, three or even more regions, would
require a combinatorial explosion of possibilities. For the sake of
brevity, we just investigated an example of two regions with feedback
connections to show that this kind of connectivity does not change the
results dramatically in comparison to unidirectional connectivity,
while an extensive study could be addressed in future works.
In Fig. 12, the upper panels (panels a–l) analyze the case in which
one region oscillates in the θ band and the other in the γ band. The
bottom panels (panels m–r) analyze a case in which one region
oscillates in the low γ band and the other in the high γ band. In both
cases, multimodal spectra can be produced in both regions if
connections have a sufﬁcient strength. In this case too, connections
to fast inhibitory interneurons are more efﬁcient to cause rhythm
propagation. It is worth noting that feedback connections may also
induce a shift in one peak (by way of example, let us see the third row,
where a peak in the β band appears, which was not originally present
in either of the two regions).
Finally, Fig. 13 shows a comparison between a real PSD obtained
on a healthy volunteer during a simple movement task (taken from
Zavaglia et al., 2008) and a spectrum simulated with a model of two
interconnected regions. In this case, we did not try a best ﬁtting, but

we simply looked for a manual adjustment of connectivity parameters
to show the similarity between real spectra and simulated ones. This
result emphasizes that spectra similar to those found in vivo can be
obtained with a parsimonious model, and just adjusting a few
connectivity weights.
Discussion
The present work extends the possibilities offered by neural mass
models to simulate real power density spectra, and to investigate
effective connectivity patterns. The main new issues are concerned
with: (i) the possibility to generate γ-rhythms using just a chain of
fast-inhibitory interneurons, without the presence of the other neural
populations; of course, in real physiological conditions the frequency
of this rhythm is not ﬁxed, but is modulated by the other populations;
(ii) the possibility to engender multiple rhythms in the same model,
without the need to include multiple synaptic kinetics; and (iii) the
role played by inputs converging into fast inhibitory interneurons to
propagate rhythms from one region to another.
In the following, each of these items is discussed separately:
(i) γ-rhythm generation: Our theoretical analysis stresses the
possibility to generate a peak in PSD within the γ-band in a simple
way, by just introducing an inhibitory loop among fast interneurons.
This loop is physiologically motivated by the presence of signiﬁcant
interconnections between fast basket cells, as observed in the
hippocampus (Cobb et al., 1997) and in the neo-cortex (Kisvarday
et al., 1993). The idea that a self-loop of one population to itself
(frequently used in competitive neural networks) can enrich the

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

1089

Fig. 10. PSD of two regions communicating by different connectivity patterns. In this simulation, the values of the parameters are the same as in Fig. 9 except for the parameter Cpf of
the second region, which has been changed (Cpf = 0) in order to obtain a rhythm around 5 Hz. All the panels represent the same quantities as in Fig. 9.

dynamics of neural mass models was already exploited by Sotero et al.
(2007) in their recent model of overall brain dynamics. However,
these authors included a loop between pyramidal cells only, assuming
that, at a large scale, “pyramidal-to-pyramidal connections become
increasingly important, accounting for the majority of intracortical
ﬁbers.” A similar loop among inhibitory interneurons has been used
by Moran et al. (2007) to simulate γ rhythms; however, these authors
did not use two distinct populations of interneurons; in particular,
they did not simulate interneurons with GABAA,fast kinetics. A large
amount of modeling and experimental work suggests that fast
inhibitory networks play a signiﬁcant role in the genesis of γ rhythms
(Bartos et al., 2007; Jefferys et al., 1996; White et al., 1998;
Whittington et al., 1995).
Our analysis underscores that γ oscillations can be obtained using
physiological values for the time constant of fast inhibitory synapses
(range 10–20 ms), contrarily to previous works (Wendling et al.,
2002; Zavaglia et al., 2006, 2008) where one needed to use very small
values (a few ms) for the time constant of GABAA,fast interneurons.
Furthermore, the lower the time constant, the higher the oscillation
frequency. This result agrees with data reported by Whittington et al.
(1995) (see also Fig. 4 in Jefferys et al., 1996). These authors, both via
computer simulations in integrate and ﬁre neural networks and in
experimental trials during pentobarbital infusion, observed that the
frequency of γ rhythms is inversely related with the time constant of
the inhibitory post-synaptic current. Moreover, the value of the time
constants in their work is close to that used in our model.
A further interesting result of our analysis is that the frequency of
γ-rhythms is directly related with the connectivity strength among

fast interneurons (i.e., parameter Cff in Fig. 2). If this parameter is
increased by twofold or threefold with respect to its basal value, the
model predicts oscillations in the ultra γ range (about 70 Hz). For
even greater values of parameter Cff, oscillation frequency may
increase up to 80–100 Hz, although the amplitude of the PSD peak
signiﬁcantly decreases. This dependence of frequency on connectivity
requires further experimental validation.
It is worth noting that Rennie et al. (2000), using a continuum
model of electrical activity in the cortex, also ascribed the emergence
of γ rhythm to a resonance near 40 Hz. However, in their model the
resonance depends on a modulation of synaptic strength, hence to a
different mechanism compared with that exploited in the present
work.
In conclusion, the model ascribes the occurrence of a γ rhythm to
the presence of a resonance occurring within the network of fast
inhibitory interneurons, here described by means of a simple feedback
loop. In the linearized model, the frequency and amplitude of the
resonance peak depend on the time constant of the GABAA,fast
synapses and on the strength on reentrant connections between
these interneurons. In the non-linear model, these quantities can also
be modulated by the excitatory input to the fast interneurons: the
latter may affect the working point in the sigmoidal characteristic,
thus altering the loop gain.
Of course, the mechanism exploited in the present model to
generate γ rhythms may not be the unique one; alternative
mechanisms may be effective to generate γ rhythms in different
conditions, as reviewed by Jefferys et al. (1996). These may include a
recurrent inhibition between an excitatory and an inhibitory

1090

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

Fig. 11. PSD of three regions communicating by different connectivity patterns. The ﬁrst region (panels a, d, g, l) is simulated with a value of Cpf = 0, the second region (panels b, e, h, k)
with a value of Cpf = 540 and the third region (panels c, f, i, l) with a value of Cpf = 108. The other panels represent the connectivity patterns and the coherences between the regions.

population, or the presence of intrinsic pacemaker cells. The ﬁrst
mechanism is widely exploited in classic models of neural oscillators
(such as the Wilson-Cowan oscillator (Wilson and Cowan, 1972)) and
is commonly adopted in more traditional neural mass models
(Freeman, 1978; Lopes da Silva et al., 1974). However, to produce γ
rhythms, this mechanism must assume the presence of very small
time constants for the synapses. Particularly, results in Fig. 8 show
that γ rhythms in power spectral density can be generated using the
Wendling model (Wendling et al., 2002), but one needs a time
constant for fast inhibitory interneurons as low as 1–2 ms. For what
concerns the second mechanism, examples of intrinsic pacemaker
cells in the cortex are well documented (Gutfreund et al., 1995; Llinas
et al., 1991), although we are not aware of their use within neural
mass models.
Finally, it is remarkable that not only fast interneurons, but also
gap junctions can be important for some forms of γ oscillations (Wang
and Buzsaki, 1996). Probably gap junctions increase the oscillation
power, although are not necessary for their generation (Bartos et al.,
2007). Their effect may be that of increasing coupling between
interneurons populations, i.e., an increase in the coupling terms Cij of
our model.
(ii) Multiple rhythms in the same ROI: If the four populations
(pyramidal neurons, excitatory interneurons, slow and fast interneurons) which constitute a cortical column are connected with
realistic connectivity loops (Fig. 3) the model can produce two
simultaneous rhythms: the ﬁrst, in the γ band, can be ascribed to a
resonance of fast inhibitory interneurons; a second, at lower
frequencies (in the α band or β band), emerges from the other
feedback loops (i.e., loops engaging pyramidal neurons, excitatory
interneurons and slow inhibitory interneurons). It is worth noting
that this “intrinsic rhythm” is that obtainable from the traditional
Jansen and Rit model (Jansen and Rit, 1995) and represents the core of

most recent studies using neural mass models (Babajani and
Soltanian-Zadeh, 2006; David et al., 2005; David and Friston, 2003;
Sotero et al., 2007; Zavaglia et al., 2006).
Jefferys et al. (1996), in their review paper on mechanisms
generating γ rhythms, suggested that “the fact that inhibitory
networks can sustain a rhythm in the γ frequency range… separates
the synchronizing control or clock from the speciﬁc neural processing
of information.” This idea substantially agrees with the results
emerging from our model: a higher frequency rhythm originating in
the fast-inhibitory loop modulates (and is modulated by) a slower
rhythm within the same region, originating from slower synapse time
constant.
The parameter sensitivity analysis shown in Figs. 5 and 6 supports
this viewpoint. If parameter Cff is set at zero, the model cannot
generate a signiﬁcant power in the γ-band (using physiological values
of time constants) but all power is concentrated below 25 Hz.
Conversely, a signiﬁcant power above 30 Hz can be obtained with
many combinations of parameters if Cff is signiﬁcantly different from
zero. In the latter condition, if connectivity between pyramidal,
excitatory and slow-inhibitory interneurons is changed, one can
observe evident changes in PSD within the α and β bands, whereas
the PSD still exhibits a signiﬁcant contribution in the γ band (panels b
and c in Fig. 5).
Analysis of the poles in the linearized model also supports a
pivotal role for parameter Cff. Only the present model (with Cff ≠ 0)
can frequently produce two resonant peaks if linearized around a
stable equilibrium point (Fig. 7) whereas with Cff = 0 the presence
of distinct resonant peaks in the transfer function becomes very
rare. Nevertheless, our analysis also suggests that, in most conditions, the present model (as well as the Wendling model) does not
exhibit stable equilibrium points, but its behavior arises from limitcycle oscillations. We did not explore these aspects in the present

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

1091

Fig. 12. PSD of two regions communicating by different connectivity patterns. In the ﬁrst 4 rows (panels a–l), the ﬁrst region is simulated with a value of Cpf = 108 while the second
region with a value of Cpf = 27. In the last two rows (panels m–r), the ﬁrst region is simulated with a value of ωf = 55 s− 1 and with a value of Cpf = 108 while the second region with a
value of ωf = 75 s− 1 and a value of Cpf = 108. All the panels represent the same quantities as in Fig. 9.

work, but they might be the subject of future more reﬁned
theoretical analyses.
Deﬁnitely, the previous analysis suggests that the model can
generate a variety of PSDs, with two simultaneous rhythms (α + γ, or
β + γ) or even a wide-band spectrum, by simply altering internal
connectivity parameters, without the need of any ad hoc changes in
the synaptic time constants. These bimodal oscillations may arise
from the presence of two resonant peaks in the linearized model or
from a more complex non-linear limit cycle dynamics.
(iii) The role of fast interneurons on rhythm transmission between
ROIs: A remarkable result of our simulations is the pivotal role played
by long-range excitatory connections which terminate into fast
inhibitory interneurons. Indeed, the present work introduces a new
testable hypothesis that we cannot ﬁnd in previous studies: i.e., that
excitatory input to fast inhibitory interneurons plays a fundamental
role to transmit rhythms from one region to another. Our results
clearly show that a moderate synapse from pyramidal neurons in the
pre-synaptic ROI to fast inhibitory interneurons in the post-synaptic
ROI is able to transmit rhythms very efﬁcaciously, as observable in the
spectrum of the target region and in the coherence between EEGs in
the two regions. Conversely, excitatory synapses from pyramidal to
pyramidal neurons are less effective in rhythms transmission, as

revealed by the low value of coherence between the two ROIs. Only if
the strength of synapses is increased by one order of magnitude,
pyramidal to pyramidal connections become really efﬁcacious and
one can observe a high coherence (above 0.5) in the frequency band
interested by the rhythm.
According to the literature (Felleman and van Essen, 1991), longrange connectivity originates exclusively from pyramidal neurons, but
may target to different populations of neurons depending on the type
of connection. In the present study, we focused attention just on two
of these connections (from pyramidal to pyramidal and from
pyramidal to fast inhibitory) to study two target populations with
different time constants. Time constants, in fact, are the main
determinants of population dynamics. However, we repeated the
simulations in Figs. 9–12 assuming that connectivity reaches also the
slow inhibitory and the excitatory interneurons (these are not
presented for briefness). The presence of these further inputs does
not appreciably modify the previous results.
We claim that the reason why a population of fast interneurons
may be so efﬁcacious to receive an external rhythm, and transmit it to
other populations in the same area (especially to pyramidal cells), can
be found in its fast dynamics, which allow the preservation of the
overall spectral content of the external rhythms. Moreover, the

1092

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

Fig. 13. Panel a shows the power spectrum of a real cortical signal. Panel b shows the
spectrum of a signal simulated with a model of two interconnected regions: the ﬁrst
region has an intrinsic α rhythm, while the second one oscillates in β and γ ranges. The
parameters which have different values from those reported in Table 1 are: for the ﬁrst
region ωe = 120 s− 1, ωf = 55 s− 1, Cfp = 121.5, Cfs = 40.5, Cpf = 27, Cff = 135; for the
12
21
second region ωf = 55 s− 1. The weight factors are: W21
p = 200, Wp = 90, Wf = 0,
W12
f = 0. When the two regions are connected to each other, the second one shows a
power spectrum similar to the real one.

inhibitory loop of GABAA,fast interneurons with themselves is faster
compared to the loop composed of GABAA,fast interneurons and
pyramidal cells; for this reason, the perturbations that reach fast
inhibitory interneurons have a stronger effect on the entire dynamics
of the system.
It is worth noting that the term “efﬁcient connection” has been
used here just to denote the capacity to propagate a rhythm from one
population to another. Of course, it is does not necessarily implies
efﬁciency in a wider computational meaning, i.e., the capacity to
maximize information transmission with a reduced wiring cost (such
as evaluated in “small world network”; see Achard and Bullmore,
2007).
The observation that rhythm transmission is particularly efﬁcient
when connections target fast inhibitory interneurons may have a
cognitive signiﬁcance. In fact, according to the classic distinction
developed by Felleman and van Essen (1991), connectivity may
vary depending on the hierarchical level along the processing
stream. In particular, in the visual cortex lateral connections target
all layers, while top-down (backward) connections target supragranular and infra-granular layers. In both cases, inhibitory interneurons can be among the target cells. Conversely, bottom-up
(forward) connections terminate in layer 4, making synapses only
to excitatory interneurons. Hence, according to Felleman and van
Essen schema, model predicts a stronger capacity to transmit
rhythm via lateral and top-down connections, but poorer capacity
via forward connections. This distinction may have a cognitive role,
suggesting that rhythm transmission (especially in the beta and
gamma ranges) may be especially important in high level cognitive
processes, which involve lateral connections among regions at the

same hierarchical levels, and top-down inﬂuences from higher
hierarchical centers.
An important aspect, which deserves attention, is whether multimodal spectra, as those obtained in the present study, are actually
found during real measurements in vivo. Indeed, several recent
studies show real spectra in cortical regions similar to those reported
in Figs. 9–12. Spectra with two distinct peaks are presented in Rowe et
al. (2004) (see Fig. 4 in that work). In previous papers of our group, we
tried to ﬁt real spectra obtained after localization of the cortical
sources, starting from high-density scalp EEG during simple movement tasks (Ursino et al., 2007; Zavaglia et al., 2008). Frequently,
these spectra exhibited multiple peaks, in the α, β and γ bands (the
reader can look at Fig. 4 in Zavaglia et al. (2008), for various
examples). An exemplum of a real spectrum (taken from Zavaglia et
al., 2008) is shown in Fig. 13 and compared with a PSD obtained with a
model of two interconnected regions. In this ﬁgure, we did not try an
automatic best ﬁtting, but we simply adjusted connectivity parameters manually to arrive at an acceptable qualitative agreement. Best
ﬁtting of the present model to real spectra will be the subject of future
model applications, maybe through the use of Bayesian estimation
techniques (Moran et al., 2008).
A recent work by Rosanova et al. (2009), using TMS stimulation in
human volunteers, further supports the existence of different
rhythms (α, β and γ) in different cortical regions, and the possibility
that rhythms are propagated from one region to another via effective
connectivity pathways. In particular, TMS evoked an α-band
oscillation in the occipital cortex, a β-band oscillation in the parietal
cortex and a β/γ-band oscillation in the frontal cortex, but each region
could also receive a different rhythm (thus showing multimodal
spectra) from other regions via brain connections.
In the present work, we studied both uni-directional (Figs. 10 and
11) and bi-directional (Fig. 12) connections. In the ﬁrst case, the target
population may receive a further rhythm (besides its intrinsic
rhythm) from the other population, with the appearance of a more
complex spectrum. This should be easily observable in vivo (see
Rosanova et al., 2009). The case of bi-directional connection is more
complex, since the spectra of both populations are simultaneously
affected (let us consider, for instance, the exemplum in the bottom
panel in Fig. 12). In this condition, it may be difﬁcult to assess the
mechanisms leading to multimodal spectra from in vivo data, without
the use of mathematical models and algorithms for effective
connectivity estimation. This paper wishes to represent a new step
in that direction.
Finally, at the end of this discussion we wish to point out some
limitations of our work and lines for future improvements.
The present model is basically derived from the model by
Wendling et al. (2002), and differs from the recent model by Moran
et al. (2007, 2009, 2008) due to the presence of inhibitory
interneurons with GABAA,fast synaptic kinetics. We are aware that
the model by Wendling et al. was originally proposed with
reference to the hippocampus, and that some differences may
exist between the hippocampus and the cortex. Nevertheless, there
are several reasons which justify the use of the Wendling model for
the cortex too, and the extension and improvement we propose in
the present paper.
First, fast inhibitory interneurons not only represent a signiﬁcant
portion of GABAergic interneurons in the hippocampus (Freund and
Buzsaki, 1996) but they are also present in the cerebral cortex (see
Gonzalez-Burgos et al., 2005; Thomson et al., 1996). Second, several
experimental studies used receptor antagonists to analyze individual
mechanisms involved in neural oscillations; their results suggest that
similar cellular and network mechanisms, as those seen in the
hippocampus, generate γ oscillations in the cortex too (Bartos et al.,
2007; Cunningham et al., 2003; Whittington et al., 1995). The
previous two points support the idea that fast GABAA mechanisms
operate in the cortex (as in Wendling model of the hippocampus) and

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

that they have a role in generating γ rhythms both in the
hippocampus and in the cortex via similar mechanisms.
Of course, other types of neurons exist in the cortex and in the
hippocampus, besides the four populations included in the Wendling
model. At the present stage of our knowledge, a four population
model may represent a good compromise between simplicity and
completeness, since it encompasses all main dynamical aspects (i.e.,
the main types of time constants). However, inclusion of a larger
number of neuron populations, each with its own synaptic dynamics,
might improve the physiological reliability of neural mass models in
future years and might represent a subject of interesting future
activity.
Finally, it is remarkable that other authors in the past decades
developed signiﬁcant models to describe EEG spectra based on a
“neural ﬁeld approximation.” The basic idea of these models is that
the number of neurons in the cortex is large and the density of
synaptic connections is high. Hence, these models consider the cortex
as a continuum and use a set of nonlinear partial differential equations
in space and time to describe the spatiotemporal evolution of neural
activity. These models, with inclusion of fast inhibitory kinetics to
simulate γ-band oscillations, might allow a further more complete
analysis of brain rhythms, illustrating conditions in which rhythms
may propagate, amalgamate or dissipate in a continuum space. This
aspect may also represent an important subject of future work.
In conclusion, the present study proposes a new and simple
method to generate γ rhythms within neural mass models, without
the need to modify synaptic kinetics. In particular, three different
conditions have been analyzed with the model. In the ﬁrst (named
“reduced model”) we just considered connectivity among fast
interneurons taken alone, and demonstrated that this model can
produce a gamma rhythm per se. In a second condition (named the
“complete model”) we simulated the behavior of a single ROI
(mimicked through the interaction among four populations) and
showed that this model can produce a spectrum with two distinct
peaks (in the beta and gamma ranges, or in the alpha and gamma
ranges). In particular, a γ rhythm emerging from a fast interneuron
loop modulates (and is modulated by) the internal slower rhythm
emerging from the other loops. Finally, the last model (named the
“coupled complete model”) was obtained by considering the
interaction between two or three interconnected ROIs; it can simulate
more complex multimodal spectra, with a variety of rhythms (some
intrinsic and some received from other ROIs) similar to those
observed in vivo. In particular, the results stress that long-range
excitatory synapses with time delay, directed to fast interneurons are
particularly effective in transmitting rhythms from one region to
another. These results, which may be tested by ad hoc experiments,
can help the construction of more adequate models to ﬁt in vivo data,
and can be exploited to attain a deeper comprehension of the effect of
connectivity patterns among ROIs.

References
Achard, S., Bullmore, E., 2007. Efﬁciency and cost of economical brain functional
networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 3, e17.
Babajani, A., Soltanian-Zadeh, H., 2006. Integrated MEG/EEG and fMRI model based on
neural masses. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 53, 1794–1801.
Bartos, M., Vida, I., Jonas, P., 2007. Synaptic mechanisms of synchronized gamma
oscillations in inhibitory interneuron networks. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 45–56.
Basar, E., Basar-Eroglu, C., Karakas, S., Schurmann, M., 2000. Brain oscillations in
perception and memory. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 35, 95–124.
Basar, E., Basar-Eroglu, C., Karakas, S., Schurmann, M., 2001. Gamma, alpha, delta, and
theta oscillations govern cognitive processes. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 39, 241–248.
Buzsàki, G., 2006. Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford University Press, New York.
Cobb, S.R., Buhl, E.H., Halasy, K., Paulsen, O., Somogyi, P., 1995. Synchronization of
neuronal activity in hippocampus by individual GABAergic interneurons. Nature
378, 75–78.
Cobb, S.R., Halasy, K., Vida, I., Nyiri, G., Tamas, G., Buhl, E.H., Somogyi, P., 1997. Synaptic
effects of identiﬁed interneurons innervating both interneurons and pyramidal
cells in the rat hippocampus. Neuroscience 79, 629–648.

1093

Cona, F., Zavaglia, M., Astolﬁ, L., Babiloni, F., Ursino, M., 2009. Changes in EEG power
spectral density and cortical connectivity in healthy and tetraplegic patients during
a motor imagery task. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 279515 –.
Cunningham, M.O., Davies, C.H., Buhl, E.H., Kopell, N., Whittington, M.A., 2003. Gamma
oscillations induced by kainate receptor activation in the entorhinal cortex in vitro.
J. Neurosci. 23, 9761–9769.
David, O., Friston, K.J., 2003. A neural mass model for MEG/EEG: coupling and neuronal
dynamics. Neuroimage 20, 1743–1755.
David, O., Harrison, L., Friston, K.J., 2005. Modelling event-related responses in the
brain. Neuroimage 25, 756–770.
Engel, A.K., Singer, W., 2001. Temporal binding and the neural correlates of sensory
awareness. Trends Cogn. Sci. 5, 16–25.
Felleman, D.J., van Essen, D.C., 1991. Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate
cerebral cortex. Cereb. Cortex 1, 1–47.
Freeman, W.J., 1975. Mass Action in the Nervous System. Academic Press, New York.
Freeman, W.J., 1978. Models of the dynamics of neural populations. Electroencephalogr.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 34, 9–18.
Freund, T.F., Buzsaki, G., 1996. Interneurons of the hippocampus. Hippocampus 6,
347–470.
Friston, K.J., 2005. Models of brain function in neuroimaging. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 56,
57–87.
Gonzalez-Burgos, G., Krimer, L.S., Povysheva, N.V., Barrionuevo, G., Lewis, D.A., 2005.
Functional properties of fast spiking interneurons and their synaptic connections
with pyramidal cells in primate dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 93,
942–953.
Grimbert, F., Faugeras, O., 2006. Bifurcation analysis of Jansen's neural mass model.
Neural. Comput. 18, 3052–3068.
Gutfreund, Y., Yarom, Y., Segev, I., 1995. Subthreshold oscillations and resonant
frequency in guinea-pig cortical neurons: physiology and modelling. J. Physiol.
(Lond). 483 (Pt. 3), 621–640.
Jansen, B.H., Rit, V.G., 1995. Electroencephalogram and visual evoked potential
generation in a mathematical model of coupled cortical columns. Biol. Cybern.
73, 357–366.
Jansen, B.H., Zouridakis, G., Brandt, M.E., 1993. A neurophysiologically-based mathematical model of ﬂash visual evoked potentials. Biol. Cybern. 68, 275–283.
Jefferys, J.G., Traub, R.D., Whittington, M.A., 1996. Neuronal networks for induced
'40 Hz' rhythms. Trends Neurosci. 19, 202–208.
Kiebel, S.J., Garrido, M.I., Moran, R.J., Friston, K.J., 2008. Dynamic causal modelling for
EEG and MEG. Cogn. Neurodyn. 2, 121–136.
Kisvarday, Z.F., Beaulieu, C., Eysel, U.T., 1993. Network of GABAergic large basket cells in
cat visual cortex (area 18): implication for lateral disinhibition. J. Comp. Neurol.
327, 398–415.
Llinas, R.R., Grace, A.A., Yarom, Y., 1991. In vitro neurons in mammalian cortical layer 4
exhibit intrinsic oscillatory activity in the 10- to 50-Hz frequency range. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 88, 897–901.
Lopes da Silva, F.H., Hoeks, A., Smits, H., Zetterberg, L.H., 1974. Model of brain rhythmic
activity. The alpha-rhythm of the thalamus. Kybernetik 15, 27–37.
Maex, R., De, S.E., 2007. Mechanism of spontaneous and self-sustained oscillations in
networks connected through axo-axonal gap junctions. Eur. J. Neurosci. 25,
3347–3358.
Moran, R.J., Kiebel, S.J., Stephan, K.E., Reilly, R.B., Daunizeau, J., Friston, K.J., 2007. A
neural mass model of spectral responses in electrophysiology. Neuroimage 37,
706–720.
Moran, R.J., Stephan, K.E., Kiebel, S.J., Rombach, N., O'Connor, W.T., Murphy, K.J., Reilly,
R.B., Friston, K.J., 2008. Bayesian estimation of synaptic physiology from the
spectral responses of neural masses. Neuroimage 42, 272–284.
Moran, R.J., Stephan, K.E., Seidenbecher, T., Pape, H.C., Dolan, R.J., Friston, K.J., 2009.
Dynamic causal models of steady-state responses. Neuroimage 44, 796–811.
Neltner, L., Hansel, D., Mato, G., Meunier, C., 2000. Synchrony in heterogeneous
networks of spiking neurons. Neural. Comput. 12, 1607–1641.
Nunez, P., 1995. Neocortical Dynamics and Human EEG Rhythms. Oxford University
Press, New York.
Rennie, C.J., Wright, J.J., Robinson, P.A., 2000. Mechanisms of cortical electrical activity
and emergence of gamma rhythm. J. Theor. Biol. 205, 17–35.
Rennie, C.J., Robinson, P.A., Wright, J.J., 2002. Uniﬁed neurophysical model of EEG
spectra and evoked potentials. Biol. Cybern. 86, 457–471.
Robinson, P.A., Rennie, C.J., Wright, J.J., Bahramali, H., Gordon, E., Rowe, D.L., 2001.
Prediction of electroencephalographic spectra from neurophysiology. Phys. Rev. E.
Stat. Nonlin. Soft. Matter Phys. 63, 021903 –.
Rosanova, M., Casali, A., Bellina, V., Resta, F., Mariotti, M., Massimini, M., 2009. Natural
frequencies of human corticothalamic circuits. J. Neurosci. 29, 7679–7685.
Rowe, D.L., Robinson, P.A., Rennie, C.J., 2004. Estimation of neurophysiological
parameters from the waking EEG using a biophysical model of brain dynamics. J.
Theor. Biol. 231, 413–433.
Sik, A., Penttonen, M., Ylinen, A., Buzsaki, G., 1995. Hippocampal CA1 interneurons: an
in vivo intracellular labeling study. J. Neurosci. 15, 6651–6665.
Sotero, R.C., Trujillo-Barreto, N.J., Iturria-Medina, Y., Carbonell, F., Jimenez, J.C., 2007.
Realistically coupled neural mass models can generate EEG rhythms. Neural
Comput. 19, 478–512.
Thomson, A.M., West, D.C., Hahn, J., Deuchars, J., 1996. Single axon IPSPs elicited in
pyramidal cells by three classes of interneurones in slices of rat neocortex. J.
Physiol. 496 (Pt. 1), 81–102.
Tiesinga, P.H., Jose, J.V., 2000. Robust gamma oscillations in networks of inhibitory
hippocampal interneurons. Network 11, 1–23.
Traub, R.D., Contreras, D., Cunningham, M.O., Murray, H., Lebeau, F.E., Roopun, A.,
Bibbig, A., Wilent, W.B., Higley, M.J., Whittington, M.A., 2005. Single-column

1094

M. Ursino et al. / NeuroImage 52 (2010) 1080–1094

thalamocortical network model exhibiting gamma oscillations, sleep spindles, and
epileptogenic bursts. J. Neurophysiol. 93, 2194–2232.
Ursino, M., Zavaglia, M., Astolﬁ, L., Babiloni, F., 2007. Use of a neural mass model for the
analysis of effective connectivity among cortical regions based on high resolution
EEG recordings. Biol. Cybern. 96, 351–365.
Wang, X.J., Buzsaki, G., 1996. Gamma oscillation by synaptic inhibition in a hippocampal
interneuronal network model. J. Neurosci. 16, 6402–6413.
Ward, L.M., 2003. Synchronous neural oscillations and cognitive processes. Trends
Cogn. Sci. 7, 553–559.
Wendling, F., Bartolomei, F., Bellanger, J.J., Chauvel, P., 2002. Epileptic fast activity can
be explained by a model of impaired GABAergic dendritic inhibition. Eur. J.
Neurosci. 15, 1499–1508.
White, J.A., Chow, C.C., Ritt, J., Soto-Trevino, C., Kopell, N., 1998. Synchronization and
oscillatory dynamics in heterogeneous, mutually inhibited neurons. J. Comput.
Neurosci. 5, 5–16.
White, J.A., Banks, M.I., Pearce, R.A., Kopell, N.J., 2000. Networks of interneurons with
fast and slow gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) kinetics provide

substrate for mixed gamma-theta rhythm. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97,
8128–8133.
Whittington, M.A., Traub, R.D., Jefferys, J.G., 1995. Synchronized oscillations in
interneuron networks driven by metabotropic glutamate receptor activation.
Nature 373, 612–615.
Wilson, H.R., Cowan, J.D., 1972. Excitatory and inhibitory interactions in localized
populations of model neurons. Biophys. J. 12, 1–24.
Wright, J.J., Rennie, C.J., Lees, G.J., Robinson, P.A., Bourke, P.D., Chapman, C.L., Gordon, E.,
Rowe, D.L., 2003. Simulated electrocortical activity at microscopic, mesoscopic, and
global scales. Neuropsychopharmacology 28 (Suppl. 1), S80–S93.
Zavaglia, M., Astolﬁ, L., Babiloni, F., Ursino, M., 2006. A neural mass model for the
simulation of cortical activity estimated from high resolution EEG during cognitive
or motor tasks. J. Neurosci. Methods 157, 317–329.
Zavaglia, M., Astolﬁ, L., Babiloni, F., Ursino, M., 2008. The effect of connectivity on
EEG rhythms, power spectral density and coherence among coupled neural
populations: analysis with a neural mass model. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 55,
69–77.

