ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 12 December 2008
doi: 10.3389/neuro.10.005.2008

COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE

Modeling thalamocortical cell: impact of Ca2+ channel
distribution and cell geometry on firing pattern
Reza Zomorrodi 1,2, Helmut Kröger 1 and Igor Timofeev 2,3*
1
2
3

Department of Physics, Laval University, Quebec, Canada
The Centre de recherche Université Laval Robert-Giffard (CRULRG), Laval University, Quebec, Canada
Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Laval University, Quebec, Canada

Edited by:
Terrence J. Sejnowski, The Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, USA
Reviewed by:
William Lytton, SUNY Downstate, USA
Maksim Bazhenov, University of
California, USA
*Correspondence:
Igor Timofeev, The Centre de
Recherche Université Laval RobertGiffard, Local F-6500, 2601 de la
Canardière, Québec, (QC) G1J 2G3,
Canada.
e-mail: Igor.Timofeev@phs.ulaval.ca

The influence of calcium channel distribution and geometry of the thalamocortical cell upon
its tonic firing and the low threshold spike (LTS) generation was studied in a 3-compartment
model, which represents soma, proximal and distal dendrites as well as in multi-compartment
model using the morphology of a real reconstructed neuron. Using an uniform distribution of
Ca2+ channels, we determined the minimal number of low threshold voltage-activated calcium
channels and their permeability required for the onset of LTS in response to a hyperpolarizing
current pulse. In the 3-compartment model, we found that the channel distribution influences
the firing pattern only in the range of 3% below the threshold value of total T-channel density.
In the multi-compartmental model, the LTS could be generated by only 64% of unequally
distributed T-channels compared to the minimal number of equally distributed T-channels. For a
given channel density and injected current, the tonic firing frequency was found to be inversely
proportional to the size of the cell. However, when the Ca2+ channel density was elevated in
soma or proximal dendrites, then the amplitude of LTS response and burst spike frequencies
were determined by the ratio of total to threshold number of T-channels in the cell for a specific
geometry.
Keywords: thalamocortical cell, low-threshold spike, T-current, channel distribution

INTRODUCTION
Thalamocortical (TC) neurons at depolarized membrane potential
fire in tonic mode, while when released from a hyperpolarizing
state and crossing the potential between −65 and −70 mV they
generate low-threshold spikes (LTS), accompanied by sodium
spikes (Jahnsen and Llinás, 1984a). During slow-wave sleep, TC
neurons are hyperpolarized and fire preferentially LTS accompanied by high-frequency spike-bursts, while during paradoxical
sleep and likely other activated brain states they fire mainly in the
tonic mode (Hirsch et al., 1983; Steriade et al., 1993). Spike-burst
elicited during slow-wave sleep precedes and follows a period of at
least 100 ms of silence, lasts 5–20 ms and usually consists of three
to five action potentials (Domich et al., 1986). Extracellular unit
recordings demonstrated also the presence of high frequency spiketrains during waking states (Bezdudnaya et al., 2006; Sherman and
Guillery, 2002). Both high frequency spike-trains at depolarized
potentials and low-threshold spike-bursts elicited by synaptic volleys can have similar shape despite different underlying mechanisms
(Rosanova and Timofeev, 2005). The low-threshold calcium current
(IT) underlies burst generation in TC relay cells and plays a central
role in the generation of synchronized sleep oscillations (Destexhe
and Sejnowski, 2001; Steriade and Deschénes, 1984; Steriade et al.,
1993, 1997; Timofeev et al., 2001).
Ascending and descending inputs to thalamic relay cells arrive
at different compartments of the dendritic tree (Jones, 1985) and
their integration depends on a large set of intrinsic currents. In
order to reproduce correctly synaptic integration, numerical simulations need to incorporate the electrically active properties of the

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

dendritic tree. A multi-compartment model is required to consider
the effects of dendritic currents. A first step in this regard was carried out by Destexhe et al. (1998) who studied relay cell models with
a dendritic tree, which incorporated dendritic T-current densities.
In that work, a comparison of T-current density recorded from
acutely dissociated and relatively intact cells suggested a higher
T-current density in the dendrites compared to the soma. In addition, the high distal T-current density predicted in that model led to
a number of speculations (Zhan et al., 2000) on relay cell responses
to synaptic inputs arriving to distal dendrites. Fluorescent imaging
study (Zhou et al., 1997) and patch clamp recordings from soma
and proximal dendrites (Williams and Stuart, 2000) suggested a
higher density of T-channels on proximal dendrites. However, a
high density of T-channels in distal dendrites was not required to
reproduce low-threshold spikes in a model (Rhodes and Llinas,
2005). Previously, both, experimental and modeling studies were
not efficient in detecting the presence and the amplitude (value) of
T-current in distal dendrites. Thus, the distribution of T-channels
in the membrane of TC neurons remains to be elucidated.
Since the active property of the dendrites affects synaptic integration and response of the neuron (De Schutter and Bower, 1994a,b;
Goldberg et al., 2007; Koch, 1999; Mainen and Sejnowski, 1996), in
the present study the pattern of T-channel distribution was investigated in computational experiments. Given the experimental
fact that T-channels are distributed unevenly over the TC neuron
membrane, we examined different forms of non-uniform distribution in the multi-compartment model in order to find possible
effects of channel distribution on the cell response. We started

www.frontiersin.org

December 2008 | Volume 2 | Article 5 | 1

Zomorrodi et al.

Model of thalamocortical neuron

with 3-compartment model and then we extended the model to
1267 compartments with a realistic morphology of the TC cell.
We hypothesize that the low-threshold response of a TC neuron
can be correctly reproduced in a multi-compartment model with
an appropriate distribution of T-channel density. Moreover, we
hypothesize that the specific form of channel distribution should
have physiological benefits for the cell. Here we show that the
number of T-channels in the cell has a prime influence on LTS
bursting and that the shape of the distribution becomes important
only in a specific range of the total number of T-channels. Since
different types of TC cells have different geometrical parameters,
we also investigated the influence of the cell geometry on the firing pattern.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
MODEL

The electrophysiological response of a thalamocortical cell can
be modeled by a set of coupled differential equations with an
appropriate set of parameters (McMullen and Ly, 1988; Rose and
Hindmarsh, 1985) based on experiments by Jahnsen and Llinás
(1984a,b). In our simulation, we also used the Hodgkin–Huxley
model for the TC cell. In order to reproduce the low-threshold
response of the TC neuron, the kinetics of the T-current was
taken from voltage clamp experiments (McCormick and
Huguenard, 1992).
The main feature of the electrophysiological response of a TC
cell can be reproduced already from a single-compartment model

Figure 1 | Simulated rebound burst in TC cell from a single-compartment
model. The model involves the leak current, fast Na+/K+ currents and the lowthreshold Ca2+ current. Left panel: response of cell to different injection currents,
at the same level of membrane potential: tonic firing for 0.2 nA (top), passive

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

involving Na+, K+ and T-currents in the framework of Hodgkin–
Huxley equations. Figure 1 shows the tonic response and the
burst spiking of the modeled TC neuron. Above we proposed the
hypothesis that all features of rebound spike-burst behavior can
be reproduced in a multi-compartment model, if one takes into
account the channel distribution in dendrites. The 3-compartment
model simulations of TC neuron responses shown in this article
have been carried out using the NEURON simulating environment
(Hines and Carnevale, 1997).
3-COMPARTMENT MODEL

The ultimate goal of our study is to understand how the T-channel
distribution influences the electrophysiological response of real
TC neurons. The first steps of the study, however, were carried out
using the 3-compartment model, which allows to test parameters
with high computational efficiency. Those compartments represent
the somatic segment and the dendritic arbor composed of proximal and distal segments. According to a previous study (Destexhe
et al., 1998), the 3-compartment model allows with good precision
to reproduce major electrophysiological features of TC cells. In
our simulations, the basic (“control”) parameters of the three sections are the following: length (l) and diameters (d): ls = 38.41 μm,
ds = 26 μm for soma, lp = 12.49 μm, dp = 10.28 μm for proximal
section and ld = 84.67 μm, dd = 8.5 μm for distal section (Figure 2).
We have made the assumption that passive parameters of the cell
(e.g. leak conductance, cytoplasmic resistance, and capacitance)
are held constant in each compartment. The passive response of

response for 0.1 nA (middle) and burst firing for −0.1 nA (bottom). Right panel:
response of the cell to a depolarizing current (0.1 nA) at different levels of
membrane potential: tonic firing for Vm = −55 mV, passive response for
Vm = −65 mV and burst firing for Vm = −75 mV.

www.frontiersin.org

December 2008 | Volume 2 | Article 5 | 2

Zomorrodi et al.

Model of thalamocortical neuron

the model with a dendritic correction factor, Cd = 7.95 (see Eq. 1)
is fitted to the passive response of the cell during voltage-clamp
recording. The Hodgkin–Huxley equations for the 3-compartment
model are given by
dV1
= − g L (V1 − E L ) − g Nam 3h(V1 − E Na ) − g kn 4 (V1 − E k )
dt
(V − V2 )
+ I inj ,
− PCar 2sG (V1 , Ca o , Ca i ) − g 12 1
A1
dV
C dC m 2 = −C d g L (V2 − E L ) − C d PCar 2sG (V2 , Ca o , Ca i )
dt
(V − V1 )
(V − V2 )
,
− g 12 2
− g 32 3
A1
A2
dV
C dC m 3 = −C d g L (V3 − E L ) − C d PCar 2sG (V3 , Ca o , Ca i )
dt
(V − V2 )
.
− g 32 3
A3
Cm

lj ⎞
1
2R ⎛ l
= rji = a ⎜ i2 + 2 ⎟ .
i
gj
π ⎝ di d j ⎠

(1)

Figure 2 | Effects of permeability from Ca2+ increase on generation of LTS
response in a 3-compartment model with uniform channel distribution.
(A) Schematic representation of 3-compartment model with uniform channel
distribution. (B–I) Response of modeled TC neuron (Vm = −75 mV) to

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

Here V1, V2, and V3 represent the membrane potential of the
soma, proximal and distal compartments, respectively. A1, A2,
and A3 denote the area of the compartments. In this model, the
membrane capacitance, the leak conductance and the leak reversal
potential were set to Cm = 0.878 μF/cm2, gL = 0.0379 mS/cm2,
EL = −69.85 mV, respectively. The axial conductance (g ij) between
compartments depends on the geometry of the compartment and
the cytoplasmic resistance (Ra) in the following way:
(2)

Thus, the axial conductance in our model takes the following
values: g 12 = 5.187 μS and g 32 = 0.703 μS. Voltage-dependent conductances were modeled using a Hodgkin–Huxley type of kinetic
model. The kinetics of the Na+ and K+ currents responsible for
fast action potentials, were taken from a model of hippocampal pyramidal cells (Traub and Miles, 1991), assuming a resting

depolarizing current pulse (0.1 nA). The permeability for Ca2+ in each
compartment increases from (B) to (I) as indicated. With this morphology,
channel distribution and membrane potential, the onset of LTS leading to an
action potential required the permeability PCa = 1.56 × 10−4 cm/s.

www.frontiersin.org

December 2008 | Volume 2 | Article 5 | 3

Zomorrodi et al.

Model of thalamocortical neuron

potential of VT = −52 mV, maximal conductance g Na = 0.1 S/cm 2
and g K = 0.1 S/cm 2, and reversal potentials of ENa = 50 mV and
EK = −100 mV. This model has been shown to be adequate to model
the repetitive firing within bursts of action potentials (Destexhe
et al., 1996). Because of the nonlinear and far-from-equilibrium
behavior of calcium ions to model Ca2+ current we used Goldman–
Hodgkin–Katz (GHK) equation (Hille, 2001):
I T = PCam 2hG (V ,[Ca]o ,[Ca]i ),

MULTI-COMPARTMENT MODEL

1
dm
=−
(m − m∞ (V )).
τm (V )
dt
1
dh
=−
(h − h∞ (V )).
τh (V )
dt

(3)

Here PCa denotes the maximum permeability and m, h, denote
the activation and inactivation variables, with τm and τh being the
corresponding time constants. The kinetic functions are taken from
Destexhe et al. (1998). G (V, Cao, Cai) is a nonlinear function of the
potential and ion concentration;
G (V ,[Ca]o ,[Ca]i ) =

Z 2F 2V [Ca]i − [Ca]o exp[−ZFV / RT ]
.
1 − exp[−ZFV / RT]
RT

(4)

Here Z = 2 denotes the valence of calcium ions, F the Faraday
constant, R the gas constant, and T the temperature measured in
Kelvin. [Ca]i and [Ca]o represent the intracellular and extracellular
Ca2+ concentrations expressed in units of millimolar. The fluctuation of intracellular Ca2+ concentration is denoted by [Ca]i. It is due
to Ca2+ pumps and buffers (McCormick and Huguenard, 1992), and
is taken into account by the following differential equation:
d[C ]i
i
([C ]∞ − [C ]i )
= − Ca +
.
2Fd
τ
dt

N

1
= (1) ∫ PCa ( A) dA
PCa

(6)

Here N total, PCa(1) and A denote the total number of T-channels,
the permeability of a single channel and surface of compartment,
respectively. For a given section area, increasing the number of
channels is equivalent to increasing the permeability of the section.
In the following we will refer to the permeability of channels in
an area of 1 cm2 of the membrane simply as channel permeability.

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

We developed a multi-compartment model of the TC cell in order
to consider the effects of dendritic currents upon response of the
cell with realistic morphology. The simulations were performed
based on a TC cell reconstructed using the NeuroLucida digital system. In order to obtain precise morphological features of
the TC neuron from the VPL nucleus of thalamus, a retrograde
tracer (fluorogold) was iontophoretically applied to the somatosensory area (SI) in adult anesthetized cat in sterile conditions.
After a survival period of 2 weeks the cat was deeply anesthetized
with thiopental and intracardialy perfused. Stained neurons were
revealed using a standard ABC kit. All experimental procedures
used in this study were performed in accordance with the Canadian
guidelines for animal care and were approved by the committee
for animal care of Laval University. The reconstructed cell used for
the model included 11 primary branches and 224 segments with a
dendritic membrane area of 45 000 × 10−6 m2. Our model contains
1267 compartments, based on the d-lambda rule of NEURON. The
simulation of the multi-compartment model took approximately
12 min on a Pentium(R) M with 2.00 GHz processor to run 800 ms
of neuronal activity.

RESULTS
(5)

Here iCa denotes the current density, d = 0.1 μm the depth of
the shell below the membrane, [C]∞ = 240 nM the equilibrium
concentration and τ = 5 ms the time constant of decay of [Ca2+],
respectively. The parameters were taken from the 3-compartment
model by Destexhe et al. (1998).
The value of permeability PCa in the low-threshold calcium current (Eq. 3) indicates the maximum permeability of the section
expressed in units of cm/s. This value represents the permeability
of a patch of 1 cm2 of membrane. Therefore, the total permeability
of the section is obtained by integration over the entire surface. On
the other hand, the total permeability of a section is the product
of permeability of a single channel and total number of channels.
Thus holds
total

In the section “Calcium Channel Distribution”, we consider the
influence of the number of channels and its distribution on the
burst response of TC cell. We also consider in the section “MultiCompartment Model” the influence of geometrical parameters (e.g.
diameter, area) on the response of the cell.
In order to simplify calculations, we did not take into account
the h-current in the model, because this current does not contribute
directly to the generation of LTS.

CALCIUM CHANNEL DISTRIBUTION

In the following simulations, we determined the minimum value
(threshold) of the number of T-channels (Nthr) and a corresponding
value of permeability (Pthr) in each section, which enables the generation of LTS in the TC cell. The threshold number of T-channels
is defined here as the minimal number of T-channels required to
produce LTS in the 3-compartment model. This threshold value
corresponds to the onset of the first sodium spike generated by LTS
in response to a depolarized current of Iinj = 0.1 nA, while the cell
is being hyperpolarized to Vm = −75 mV. However, if threshold LTS
was obtained under different conditions (e.g., different level of Vm
and/or different level of Iinj) it did not affect the results presented
in this study.
RESULTS OF NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS

In the first simulation, based on the 3-compartment model, the
calcium channel density was kept equal in each compartment,
which means equal permeability for Ca2+ ions in each compartment (Figure 2A). According to experimental data from dissociated
cells (Destexhe et al., 1998), the permeability in each compartment was set to the value of PCa = 1.7 × 10−5 cm/s. Using this
value in each compartment, the model gives a passive response
to a depolarizing injected current (0.1 nA), at a hyperpolarized
membrane potential (−75 mV). Parallel increase in permeability
in the three compartments by the same amount induced first a

www.frontiersin.org

December 2008 | Volume 2 | Article 5 | 4

Zomorrodi et al.

Model of thalamocortical neuron

sub-threshold response, which grew in amplitude as PCa increased
(Figures 2B–D). When the value of permeability at each compartment reached PCa = 1.56 × 10−4 cm/s, the modeled cell reproduced
the first LTS mediated action potential (Figure 2E). This permeability was defined as the threshold permeability under conditions
of Vm = −75 mV and Iinj = 0.1 nA. The threshold permeability corresponds to the threshold number of Ca2+ channels (Nthr) in the cell
necessary to generate the first rebound spike in the model. The total
number of T-channels in the cell is proportional to the product
of compartment area and permeability of Ca2+ channels in each
compartment. The membrane potential fluctuates due to changes
in channel permeability. Because the threshold value depends on
the level of membrane potential, we used a steady holding current
to keep the membrane potential at −75 mV when we changed PCa.
In the case of an uniform T-channel distribution further increase
in permeability produced LTS of larger amplitude leading to
multiple spike generation with increasing intra-burst firing frequency (Figures 2F–I). Because the experimental data suggest a
non-uniform T-channel distribution in TC neurons (Williams and
Stuart, 2000; Zhou et al., 1997), we examined different shapes of
non-uniform distribution of T-channels in the model leading to
an LTS response.

Figure 3 | Different shapes of Ca2+ channel distribution can generate
LTS spiking. Each line shows schematically the level of permeability
in each compartment and its corresponding number of channels,
which generate the threshold sodium spike similar to the response in

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

The total number of T-channels was kept constant and equal to Nthr,
which is the minimum number of T-channels necessary to generate an
LTS response in a cell with uniform channel distribution. We explored
a variety of T-channel distributions that produced a first LTS mediated action potential in the model. Some examples of permeability
distribution and its corresponding channel number in each compartment leading to an action potential are shown in Figure 3. Both,
uniform and non-uniform distributions of T-channels can produce
an LTS response with sodium spike in the model cell. This suggests
that when the total number of T-channels equals Nthr then the shape
of channel distribution does not affect the LTS response of the cell
(Figure 4A). However, if the total number of channels was lowered the
response of the cell depended on the shape of channel distribution. Far
from the threshold value of the total number of T-channels any form
of distribution gave a passive response, but when the total number
of T-channels was close to threshold value, the response of the cell
depended on the form of channel distribution (Figures 4B–D).
Using small changes in the channel number in the 3-compartment
model with non-uniform channel distribution, we found a small
window in the total number of channels located below the defined
threshold of onset of LTS with spikes which was able to induce an
LTS mediated action potential

Figure 2E. The channel number in each section is given by integration
over the entire surface of the section. Both uniform and nonuniform distribution of T channels can produce LTS response in the
modeled cell.

www.frontiersin.org

December 2008 | Volume 2 | Article 5 | 5

Zomorrodi et al.

Model of thalamocortical neuron

Figure 4 | Total number of Ca2+ channels and its distribution determines
whether LTS will lead or not to an action potential. (A) When the total
number of T-channels was equal to threshold value (N thr), the model neuron
produced an LTS – action potential response with both, non-uniform and
uniform channel distribution. (B) When the total number of channels was far
from threshold value, the model gave LTS response not accompanied by
action potentials. In this 3-compartment model, the response has
no spikes as long as the total number of T-channels was below 0.97 × N thr.

N min = 0.97N thr ≤ N total < N max = N thr .

(7)

In such window, the spiking behavior was found to be variable:
when the total number of channels was between Nthr and 0.97 × Nthr, a
uniform permeability distribution did not generated LTS with sodium
spikes, while a non-uniform distribution could generate a full LTS
response (Figure 4E). We also tested extreme cases where the Ca2+ permeability took the value 0 in two out of three compartments, and Ntotal
was still 0.97 × Nthr. These results led to the assumption that the modeled cell can generate a rebound burst response for an optimal number
of T-channels, which were distributed in a specific non-uniform pattern. We hypothesize that the physiological reason for the existence
of such window on one hand may be related to reduced metabolic
energy consumption (see Discussion), and on the other hand to the
ability of the TC cell to generate a variable response pattern.

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

(C) Between these two limits, the response of the neuron was sensitive to
the shape of the T-channel distribution. To illustrate this feature, we set the
total number of channels equal to 0.98 × N thr. (D) Numbers show
T-channel permeability in each compartment for different patterns of
T-channel distribution, when the total number of T-channels was equal to
0.98 × Nthr. (E) A diagram shows a window in which an LTS response
accompanied by spikes occurs, when non-uniform distribution of T-channels
takes place.

EFFECT OF CELL GEOMETRY ON FIRING PATTERN

Firing patterns do not only depend on the channel density and
type of current, but also on the geometry of the cell (length,
diameter, area, etc.) (Mainen and Sejnowski, 1996) as well as on
the cell topology (symmetry, mean path length, etc.) (van Ooyen
et al., 2002). Here we examined the influence of the cell geometry on the firing pattern in the 3-compartment model of the
TC neuron. For this purpose, we changed the diameter of each
compartment, while holding constant the diameter of other sections, the channel densities, and the injected current. In addition,
we set the total number of channel equal to 0.98 × N thr where
the spiking induced by the LTS response of the cell is sensitive
to the shape of distribution of the T-channels. Like in previous
simulations, the model includes the Na+/K+ current in soma and
the T-current in soma, proximal and distal compartments. First, a

www.frontiersin.org

December 2008 | Volume 2 | Article 5 | 6

Zomorrodi et al.

Model of thalamocortical neuron

non-uniform T-channel distribution has been considered obeying
the following relation:
PCa (distal dendrite) < PCa (soma) < PCa (proximal dendrite).

(8)

In a control situation, a hyperpolarizing current pulse induced an
LTS response accompanied with action potentials and a depolarizing
current pulse induced tonic firing with six spikes (Figure 5A). We
kept constant the channel density for different cell geometries. The
variation of Ntotal and Nthr altered the response of the cell. With channel density held constant, a decrease in the size of all compartments
led to an increase in the input resistance, higher frequency of tonic
firing and stronger LTS response (Figure 5B, I and V). Increasing the
size of the cell led to a decrease in input resistance of the cell, and as
consequence to lower excitability, expressed as a reduced firing frequency and absence of tonic or LTS response (Figure 5C, I and V).
We analyzed the effect of size of the section on the cell responses. A
reduction in the size of an individual compartment (soma, proximal
or distal denrites) led to an increase in input resistance and frequency

Figure 5 | Influence of geometry on the response of cell with a higher
T-channel density in proximal section. (A) In a control situation
(Ntotal = 0.98 × Nthr) the model TC cell generates six spikes in response to a
0.2 nA depolarizing current pulse and one rebound spike in response to a
−0.1 nA hyperpolarizing current pulse. (B,C; I–IV) Decreasing/increasing the cell
size increases/decreases input resistance of the cell. This causes higher/lower
frequency of tonic response to a depolarizing current. (B,C; V, VII, VIII). For a

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

of tonic response (Figure 5B, II–IV). However, the LTS response to
a hyperpolarizing current injection was different. When the diameter of soma changed to 1/3 of its initial value, the total number of
T-channels reduced to 69% of threshold value, which was far from
the lower limit (97%) of total T-channels to generate a rebound
burst response (Figure 5B, VI). When the diameter of proximal or
distal dendrite was decreased, then N total decreased. Despite this,
such number was higher than the threshold (minimal) number of
T-channels required to generate an LTS response. During rebound
the neuron fired with large number of action potentials (Figure 5B,
VII–VIII). Increasing the size of the cell reduced input resistance
resulting in passive responses in reaction to a depolarized or hyperpolarized current (Figure 5C, I and V). Smaller soma or dendritic
section reduced firing frequency and even prevented induction of
action potentials during tonic or LTS response (Figure 5C, II–V, VII
and VIII). Again, for a T-current distribution with higher density in
proximal section, an LTS response for a bigger soma does not follow the expected pattern. Increasing the somatic area reduced tonic

constant density of T-channels, reducing/increasing the size of the cell, or
reducing/increasing the dendritic area increased/decreased input resistance as
well as Ntotal of the cell. This gives more/less sodium spikes induced by LTS.
(B,C; VI) Despite the fact that smaller/larger soma has a higher/lower input
resistance, the number of T-channels is also decreased/increased. Therefore, the
same hyperpolarized current pulse was found sufficient/insufficient to activate
enough T-channels for rebound burst response.

www.frontiersin.org

December 2008 | Volume 2 | Article 5 | 7

Zomorrodi et al.

Model of thalamocortical neuron

frequency but generated more sodium spikes during the rebound
burst. In this case, the total number of T-channels was 150% of the
threshold value. This means that the same hyperpolarized current
can activate more T-channels which leads to a larger LTS response
with more action potentials (Figure 5C, VI). These numerical simulations based on a 3-compartment model of TC cell for the case of a
higher density of T-channel in proximal dendritic section show that
smaller distal dendrites and bigger soma are favorable to generate
rebound bursts in the TC neuron.
Further, we investigated the effect of cell size on rebound
spike generation when the density of T-current was higher in soma

Figure 6 | Influence of geometry on the response of cell with a higher
T-channel density in somatic or distal dendritic sections. (A) LTS response
with a higher density of T-channels located in soma. (A; I, III and IV) Reducing
the size of the cell decreased the total number of T-channels, but still its value
was higher than threshold. Thus the model produced an LTS response
accompanied with burst firing. (A; V, VII, VIII) Increasing the size of the cell
increased the total number of T-channels, which was smaller than threshold.
Thus model reproduced a passive response. (A; II) Reducing the size of the

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

(Figure 6A) or distal dendrite (Figure 6B). When a higher density of
T-channels was located in the somatic section, increasing/decreasing somatic diameter increased/reduced the input resistance of the
cell. Hence, a higher/lower frequency in the response to a depolarizing current pulse was obtained (not shown). When the total number
of T-channels exceeded the threshold value in a larger cell, having
a lower input resistance, the injected hyperpolarizing current activated a sufficient number of T-channels to generate a rebound burst
(Figure 6A, II and VI). Increasing size of both, the proximal and
distal dendritic section, did not shift the ratio of the number of
total and threshold T-channels to a specific range which generates

soma changes the ratio in the number of total to threshold T-channels to the
value of 48%. This was not sufficient to generate LTS. (A; VI) increasing the size
of soma changed the ratio in the channel number to 178%, which leads to a
rebound burst. (B) The LTS response with a higher density of T-channels located
in distal dendrites. (B; I–VIII) Reducing the cell size makes the cell more
excitable, which produces a higher frequency for the LTS response. A larger cell
has a smaller input resistance and the ratio of Ntotal to Nthr of T-channels was
found to lie outside of the range of LTS generation.

www.frontiersin.org

December 2008 | Volume 2 | Article 5 | 8

Zomorrodi et al.

Model of thalamocortical neuron

a rebound burst response (Figure 6A, VII and VIII). Decreasing
the diameter of dendritic sections provided a higher than threshold value for T-channels which led to more sodium spikes during
LTS response (Figure 6A, I, III and IV). When a higher density of
T-channels was located in distal dendrites (Figure 6B), reducing the
size of the cell increased input resistance and Ntotal, causing more
sodium spikes during LTS (Figure 6B, I–IV). With increased cell
size and constant channel density, the rebound burst was found
absent (Figure 6B, V–VIII).
MULTI-COMPARTMENT MODEL

In a multi-compartment model of the TC cell, reconstructed from
fluorogold retrograde staining (Figure 7, Ferecskó et al., 2007), we
distributed non-uniformly the T-channels throughout the cell.
We assumed a Gaussian distribution with specific mean value
attributed to a high density of T-channels in the proximal, middle, and distal dendrites. In addition, the width of the Gaussian
function, defined by parameter σ was changed to study the effect
of local channel density on LTS generation (Figure 8). Like in
the 3-compartment model we defined the minimum number of
T-channels in the uniform distribution, as the number sufficient to
generate an LTS leading to a single spike in response to a depolarized current of 0.1 nA, at hyperpolarized level of Vm = −75 mV. The
numerical simulation of an LTS response in which a non-uniform
T-channel distribution was used shows that a smaller number of
T-channels was sufficient to generate an LTS response. In all simulations with non-uniform channels distribution, the LTS with a
single spike was generated when Ntotal = 0.9 × Nthr for σ = 2, and it
was Ntotal = 0.8 × Nthr for σ = 0.5 (Figure 8). However, when the
local T-channel density on proximal dendrites was high (σ = 0.5),
the LTS accompanied by action potential was generated with only
N total = 0.64 × N thr (Figure 8). Thus, our model predicts that a high

Figure 7 | Morphology of reconstructed TC cell. Three-dimensional
reconstruction of TC cell from VPL nucleus of adult cat. Retrograde tracer
(fluorogold) was injected in somatosensory area SI. The complete dendritic
arbor was reconstructed from six serial sections 80 µm each.

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

local channel density on proximal dendrites favors LTS generation
with a minimal number of channels.

DISCUSSION
The prime objective of this study was to investigate how different
patterns of T-channel distributions influence the LTS response of a
TC cell in a 3-compartment and a multi-compartment model. We
also investigated the influence of the cell size on the firing pattern.
The major findings of this study are: (1) An increase in the value
of permeability (number of channels) uniformly in three compartments changed the response of the TC cell from passive to
LTS behavior being accompanied by an action potential. (2) The
onset of firing does not only depend on the total permeability of
T-channels, but also on their distribution. (3) In a 3-compartment
model, with a channel number equal or above threshold the TC
cell always responded by spiking. If a non-uniform distribution of
channels was used, a number of channels smaller than threshold
can lead to neuronal firing. (4) In a multi-compartmental model
a minimal number of channels required for the generation of LTS
with spikes was found to be much lower than in the 3-compartment
model. (5) For a high density of T-channels in the soma and proximal section, the frequency of tonic firing was inversely proportional
to the diameter of the section, while the low threshold spiking
frequency was directly proportional to the diameter of the section.
(6) The steepness of channel distribution (higher local density of
channels) lowers the required minimal number of T-channels necessary for LTS generation.
Previous modeling studies on the subject compared results
obtained in dissociated cells with cells recorded from 200 μm thick
slices (Destexhe et al., 1998). Dissociated cells contained almost no
dendrites, while cell recorded from slices contained several truncated dendrites. As we show here, the dendritic arbor of TC cells
extends for more than 400 μm (Figure 7). The study by Destexhe
et al. (1998) demonstrated the presence of significant T-currents
in the dendrites. It also demonstrated that the most robust features
of LTS can be reproduced in a reduced 3-compartment model. In
our numerical simulations, we took a 3-compartment model and
demonstrated that in such model the uniform vs. non-uniform
channel distribution can influence LTS generation in the range
97–100% of channel number ratio (Figure 4). However, when we
used a morphologically intact cell as basis of our model (Figure 7),
the shape of channel distribution played a major role. If the highest
density of T-channels was located on proximal dendrites, the minimal number of T-channels able to generate an LTS-spike response
was only 64% of threshold value. Therefore, comparison of our data
to the dissociated cells or cells recorded from slices (Destexhe et al.,
1998) provided solid differences, because most of distal dendrites
are absent in the cells from slices.
A general principle, which living organisms use to accomplish
many functions, is the principle of minimal resourses. The result
of our study predicts that similar to sodium channels distribution
(Crotty et al., 2006), the non-uniform distribution of T-channels,
could be essential for the generation of LTS using minimal resources.
Most of proteins, including T-channels are synthesized in the cell
body and transported from there to its destination. Protein synthesis and transport requires energy. In addition, the metabolic energy
consumption is proportional to the ionic currents generated in

www.frontiersin.org

December 2008 | Volume 2 | Article 5 | 9

Zomorrodi et al.

Model of thalamocortical neuron

Figure 8 | T-channel distribution required for LTS generation with minimal
number of channels in multi-compartment model. The upper panel shows
the shape of T-channel distribution used in the multi-compartment model. In the
left column, the maximal channel density slowly decreases from its maximum
value. In the right column, the maximal channel density rapidly decreases from its

the neuron via ATPpase Na+/K+ or Ca2+/Na+ metabolic exchangers
(Dipolo and Beauge, 2006; Goldberg et al., 2003; Laughlin et al.,
1998; Lennie, 2003). Following LTS generation, the intracellular
Ca2+ concentration increases, and reestablishing Ca2+ concentration
takes additional energy. Thus, optimizing the number of channels
would optimize metabolic energy consumption. The closest place
for T-channels to be located in the plasma membrane is the cellular
body. However, most of inhibitory synapses are formed in the body
of TC neurons (Liu et al., 1995a,b). Thus, the shunting created by
inhibitory activities would prevent generation of LTS even with
relatively high density of T-channels. The next closest place being
energy efficient for T-channels would be the proximal portion of
the dendritic tree. Indirect experimental measures (Williams and
Stuart, 2000; Zhou et al., 1997), congruent with the current study
suggested the presence of high density of T-channels on proximal
dendrites of TC cells. Our parallel electron microscopy study using
immunogold staining of T-channel subunits in reticular thalamic
nucleus demonstrated that in reticular nucleus cells, the T-channels

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

maximum value. Below examples are given for the response of the modeled
neuron kept at −75 mV subject to 0.1 nA square current pulses. Note that the
lower number of T-channels necessary to generate LTS occurred when the
highest channel density was located in proximal dendrites. In addition, a sharp
T-channel distribution leads to LTS generation with fewer channels (bottom, right).

are non-uniformly distributed (Kovács et al., 2007). The definite
conclusion about the exact distribution of T-channels in the TC
cytoplasmic membrane may be reached from high-resolution electron microscopy experiments. Optimization of metabolic energy
consumption is a decisive factor for the ion channel distribution (Crotty et al., 2006). Our results from the three- and multicompartment model predict the existence of such window.
Even if T-channels would be equally distributed over the cytoplasmic membrane, the T-channels could be either in the phosphorylated or de-phosphorylated state. Phosphorylation facilitates the
generation of T-current at resting membrane potential (Leresche
et al., 2004). Thus, state dependent changes of the membrane potential could create a non-uniform distribution of phosphorylated
T-channels in different compartments of TC neurons and would
facilitate the generation of LTS.
We conclude that although different factors could be responsible
for a decrease in the availability of T-channels for LTS generation (physical number of channels or ratio of phosphorylated/de-

www.frontiersin.org

December 2008 | Volume 2 | Article 5 | 10

Zomorrodi et al.

Model of thalamocortical neuron

phosphorylated channels), all the factors inducing a non-uniform
distribution of T-channels on LTS generation will favor generation
of LTS. The effect of non-uniform distribution of T-channels on
LTS generation in neurons with realistic (much more complex) dendritic tree was found to be stronger. Neuron Mod files are available
on our web site (http://w3.fmed.ulaval.ca/dev/timofeevgroup/).

REFERENCES
Bezdudnaya, T., Cano, M., Bereshpolova, Y.,
Stoelzel, C. R., Alonso, J. M., and
Swadlow, H. A. (2006). Thalamic burst
mode and inattention in the awake
LGNd. Neuron 49, 421–432.
Crotty, P., Sangrey, T., and Levy, W. B.
(2006). Metabolic energy cost of action
potential velocity. J. Neurophysiol. 96,
1237–1246.
De Schutter, E., and Bower, J. M. (1994a).
An active membrane model of the
cerebellar Purkinje cell II. Simulation
of synaptic responses. J. Neurophysiol.
71, 401–419.
De Schutter, E., and Bower, J. M. (1994b).
Simulated responses of cerebellar
Purkinje cells are independent of
the dendritic location of granule cell
synaptic inputs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 91, 4736–4740.
Destexhe, A., Contreras, D., Steriade, M.,
Sejnowski, T. J., and Huguenard, J. R.
(1996). In vivo, in vitro, and
computational analysis of dendritic
calcium currents in thalamic reticular
neurons. J. Neurosci. 16, 169–185.
Destexhe, A., Neubig, M., Ulrich, D., and
Huguenard, J. (1998). Dendritic lowthreshold calcium currents in thalamic
relay cells. J. Neurosci. 18, 3574–3588.
Destexhe, A., and Sejnowski, T. (2001).
Thalamocortical Assemblies: How
Ion Channels, Single Neurons and
Large-Scale Networks Organize
Sleep Oscillations. Oxford, Oxford
University Press.
Dipolo, R., and Beauge, L. (2006). Sodium/
calcium exchanger: Influence of metabolic regulation on ion carrier interactions. Physiol. Rev. 86, 155–203.
Domich, L., Oakson, G., and Steriade, M.
(1986). Thalamic burst patterns in the
naturally sleeping cat: a comparison
between cortically projecting and
reticularis neurones. J. Physiol. 379,
429–449.
Ferecskó, A., Zomorrodi, R., Kovács, K.,
and Timofeev, I. (2007). Morphometric
analyses of dendritic arbourization of
thalamocortical neurons in somatosensory and motor nuclei of the thalamus. Can. J. Neurol. Sci. 34, S73.
Goldberg, D. H., Sripati, A. P., and
Andreou, A. G. (2003). Energy effi-

ciency in a channel model for the
spiking axon. Neurocomputing 52–54,
39–44.
Goldberg, J. A., Deister, C. A., and
Wilson, C. J. (2007). Response properties and synchronization of rhythmically firing dendritic neurons.
J. Neurophysiol. 97, 208–219.
Hille, B. (2001). Ionic Channels of
Excitable Membranes. Sunderland,
MA, Sinauer Associates INC.
Hines, M. L., and Carnevale, N. T. (1997).
The NEURON simulation environment. Neural. Comput. 9, 1179–1209.
Hirsch, J. C., Fourment, A., and Marc, M. E.
(1983). Sleep-related variations of
membrane potential in the lateral
geniculate body relay neurons of the
cat. Brain Res. 259, 308–312.
Jahnsen, H., and Llinás, R. (1984a).
Electrophysiological properties
of guinea-pig thalamic neurones:
an in vitro study. J. Physiol. 349,
205–226.
Jahnsen, H., and Llinás, R. (1984b). Ionic
basis for electroresponsiveness and
oscillatory properties of guinea-pig
thalamic neurones in vitro. J. Physiol.
349, 227–247.
Jones, E. G. (1985). The Thalamus.
New York, Plenum.
Koch, C. (1999). Biophysics of
Computation: Information Processing
in Single Neurons. New York, Oxford
University Press.
Kovács, K., Sik, A., and Timofeev, I. (2007).
Localisation of low-voltage activated
t-type Ca2+ channel subunits (Cav3.1
and Cav3.3) along the soma and dendrites of reticular and thalamocortical
neurons in the cat. Can. J. Neurol. Sci.
34, S80.
Laughlin, S. B., de Ruyter van
Steveninck, R. R., and Anderson, J. C.
(1998). The metabolic cost of neural
information. Nat. Neurosci. 1, 36–41.
Lennie, P. (2003). The cost of cortical computation. Curr. Biol. 13, 493–497.
Leresche, N., Hering, J., and Lambert, R. C.
(2004). Paradoxical potentiation of
neuronal T-type Ca2+ current by
ATP at resting membrane potential.
J. Neurosci. 24, 5592–5602.
Liu, X. B., Honda, C. N., and Jones, E. G.
(1995a). Distribution of four types of

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
H.K has been supported by NSERC Canada. I.T has been supported by NSERC Canada, CIHR, and NIH. We are grateful to
Alain Destexhe and Maxim Bazhenov for valuable advises that
helped to develop our model and K Kovács for help with staining
procedure.
synapse on physiologically identified
relay neurons in the ventral posterior
thalamic nucleus of the cat. J. Comp.
Neurol. 352, 69–91.
Liu, X. B., Warren, R. A., and Jones, E. G.
(1995b). Synaptic distribution of afferents from reticular nucleus in ventroposterior nucleus of cat thalamus.
J. Comp. Neurol. 352, 187–202.
Mainen, Z. F., and Sejnowski, T. J. (1996).
Influence of dendritic structure on
firing pattern in model neocortical
neurons. Nature 382, 363–366.
McCormick, D. A., and Huguenard, J. R.
(1992). A model of the electrophysiological properties of thalamocortical relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 68,
1384–1400.
McMullen, T. A., and Ly, N. (1988). Model
of oscillatory activity in thalamic neurons: role of voltage- and calciumdependent ionic conductances. Biol.
Cybern. 58, 243–259.
Rhodes, P. A., and Llinas, R. (2005). A
model of thalamocortical relay cells.
J. Physiol. 565, 765–781.
Rosanova, M., and Timofeev, I. (2005).
Neuronal mechanisms mediating the
variability of somatosensory evoked
potentials during sleep oscillations in
cats. J. Physiol. 562, 569–582.
Rose, R. M., and Hindmarsh, J. L. (1985).
A model of a thalamic neuron.
Proc. R. Soc. Lond., B, Biol. Sci. 225,
161–193.
Sherman, S. M., and Guillery, R. W. (2002).
The role of the thalamus in the flow
of information to the cortex. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond., B, Biol. Sci. 357,
1695–1708.
Steriade, M., and Deschénes, M. (1984).
The thalamus as a neuronal oscillator.
Brain Res. Rev. 8, 1–63.
Steriade, M., Jones, E. G., and
McCormick, D. A. (1997). Thalamus:
Organization and Function. Oxford,
Elsevier Science Ltd.
Steriade, M., McCormick, D. A., and
Sejnowski, T. J. (1993). Thalamocortical
oscillations in the sleeping and aroused
brain. Science 262, 679–685.
Timofeev, I., Bazhenov, M., Sejnowski, T.,
and Steriade, M. (2001). Contribution
of intrinsic and synaptic factors in
the desynchronization of thalamic

www.frontiersin.org

oscillatory activity. Thalamus Relat.
Syst. 1, 53–69.
Traub, R. D., and Miles, R. (1991).
Neuronal network of the hippocampus. New York, Cambridge University
Press.
van Ooyen, A., Duijnhouwer, J.,
Remme, M. W., and van Pelt, J. (2002).
The effect of dendritic topology on
firing patterns in model neurons.
Network 13, 311–325.
Williams, S. R., and Stuart, G. J.
(2000). Action potential backpropagation and somato-dendritic
distribution of ion channels in thalamocortical neurons. J. Neurosci. 20,
1307–1317.
Zhan, X. J., Cox, C. L., and Sherman, S. M.
(2000). Dendritic depolarization efficiently attenuates low-threshold
calcium spikes in thalamic relay cells.
J. Neurosci. 20, 3909–3914.
Zhou, Q., Godwin, D. W., O’Malley,
D. M., and Adams, P. R. (1997).
Visualization of calcium influx
through channels that shape the
burst and tonic firing modes of thalamic relay cells. J. Neurophysiol. 77,
2816–2825.
Conflict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that
could be construed as a potential conflict
of interest.
Received: 10 July 2008; paper pending
published: 09 October 2008; accepted:
26 November 2008; published online: 12
December 2008.
Citation: Zomorrodi R, Kröger H and
Timofeev I (2008) Modeling thalamocortical cell: impact of Ca2+ channel distribution and cell geometry on firing pattern.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. (2008) 2:5. doi:
10.3389/neuro.10.005.2008
Copyright © 2008 Zomorrodi, Kröger and
Timofeev. This is an open-access article
subject to an exclusive license agreement
between the authors and the Frontiers
Research Foundation, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
authors and source are credited.

December 2008 | Volume 2 | Article 5 | 11

