ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 16 July 2013
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2013.00094

COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE

Modulation of epileptic activity by deep brain stimulation:
a model-based study of frequency-dependent effects
Faten Mina 1,2 , Pascal Benquet 1,2 , Anca Pasnicu 3 , Arnaud Biraben 1,2,3 and Fabrice Wendling 1,2*
1
2
3

INSERM, U1099, Universite de Rennes 1, Rennes, France
Laboratoire Traitement du Signal et de L’Image, Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France
Unité d’Épileptologie, Service de Neurologie, CHU, Rennes, France

Edited by:
Peter Robinson, University of
Sydney, Australia
Reviewed by:
Peter Robinson, University of
Sydney, Australia
Anthony Burkitt, University of
Melbourne, Australia
*Correspondence:
Fabrice Wendling, Laboratoire
Traitement du Signal et de L’Image,
INSERM, Université de Rennes 1,
Campus de Beaulieu,
Bat. 22 - 35042 Rennes Cedex,
France
e-mail: fabrice.wendling@
univ-rennes1.fr

A number of studies showed that deep brain stimulation (DBS) can modulate the activity
in the epileptic brain and that a decrease of seizures can be achieved in “responding”
patients. In most of these studies, the choice of stimulation parameters is critical to
obtain desired clinical effects. In particular, the stimulation frequency is a key parameter
that is difficult to tune. A reason is that our knowledge about the frequency-dependant
mechanisms according to which DBS indirectly impacts the dynamics of pathological
neuronal systems located in the neocortex is still limited. We address this issue using both
computational modeling and intracerebral EEG (iEEG) data. We developed a macroscopic
(neural mass) model of the thalamocortical network. In line with already-existing models,
it includes interconnected neocortical pyramidal cells and interneurons, thalamocortical
cells and reticular neurons. The novelty was to introduce, in the thalamic compartment,
the biophysical effects of direct stimulation. Regarding clinical data, we used a quite unique
data set recorded in a patient (drug-resistant epilepsy) with a focal cortical dysplasia
(FCD). In this patient, DBS strongly reduced the sustained epileptic activity of the FCD
for low-frequency (LFS, < 2 Hz) and high-frequency stimulation (HFS, > 70 Hz) while
intermediate-frequency stimulation (IFS, around 50 Hz) had no effect. Signal processing,
clustering, and optimization techniques allowed us to identify the necessary conditions
for reproducing, in the model, the observed frequency-dependent stimulation effects.
Key elements which explain the suppression of epileptic activity in the FCD include: (a)
feed-forward inhibition and synaptic short-term depression of thalamocortical connections
at LFS, and (b) inhibition of the thalamic output at HFS. Conversely, modeling results
indicate that IFS favors thalamic oscillations and entrains epileptic dynamics.
Keywords: DBS, thalamocortical model, computational, centromedian nucleus, FCD, premotor cortex, epilepsy

INTRODUCTION
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) for Parkinson’s disease (PD) and
other movement and psychiatric disorders—including dystonia,
tremor, and depression—is clinically used today as a conventional
therapeutic procedure for the alleviation of symptoms (Sillay and
Starr, 2009). Since the early 90s, neurologists also attempted to
apply DBS to other neurological disorders, typically to intractable
epilepsies in order to suppress—or at least dramatically reduce—
the occurrence of seizures [see recent review in Boon et al.
(2009)]. These studies followed early scientific evidence showing
potentially beneficial effects of DBS on epileptic neural dynamics in animal models (Reimer et al., 1967; Hablitz, 1976) as well
as in patients (Cooper et al., 1973; Davis et al., 1982; Wright and
Abbreviations: CMN, Centromedian Nucleus; DBS, Deep Brain Stimulation;
EPSP, Excitatory Postsynaptic Potentials; FCD, Focal Cortical Dysplasia; FFI, FeedForward Inhibition; GPi, Globus Pallidus; HFS, High Frequency Stimulation; iEEG,
Intracerebral EEG (depth electrodes); IFS, Intermediate Frequency Stimulation;
IPSP, Inhibitory Postsynaptic Potentials; LFP, Local Field Potential; LFPsFCD , Local
Field Potentials recorded in the FCD; LFS, Low Frequency Stimulation; NS,
No Stimulation; PMC, Premotor cortex; RtN, Reticular thalamic Nucleus, STD,
Short-Term Depression; STN, Subthalamic Nucleus.

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

Weller, 1983). However, contrary to PD, the optimal “antiepileptic parameters” of DBS for reducing the frequency of seizures are
much more variable among patients and the number of nonresponders to stimulation still perplexes scientists. Moreover, in
responding patients, the fine tuning of stimulation parameters in
a patient-specific manner remains indispensable for maximizing
antiepileptic effects. On that account, many fundamental questions are frequently raised: where and when to stimulate, at which
frequency, at which current intensity, and with which current
waveform?
The answers to these questions remain bound to our current, and still limited, understanding of the mechanisms by which
DBS modulates neuronal dynamics, whether normal or pathological. Today, the precise mechanisms of neuronal modulation by
DBS remain elusive. In addition, these mechanisms are controversial as observed effects are sometimes opposite (McIntyre et al.,
2004b). Among the many studies reported over the last decade,
identified mechanisms regarding HFS include: local depolarization blockade by HFS (Beurrier et al., 2001), synaptic depression due to neurotransmitter depletion (Shen et al., 2003; Kim
et al., 2012), synaptic inhibition (Filali et al., 2004), disruption of

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 1

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

the thalamocortical network’s dysrhythmia (McIntyre and Hahn,
2010; Kendall et al., 2011). As far as LFS is concerned, some studies described a transient synaptic depression that alters synaptic
transmission (Jiang et al., 2003; Speechley et al., 2007). Finally,
IFS is routinely used in the context of presurgical evaluation of
patients with drug resistant epilepsy to map epileptogenic and
functional brain areas. It has long been observed that this type of
stimulation is prone to trigger epileptic afterdischarges (Goddard,
1967). This brief overview shows that the spectrum of involved
mechanisms is very large and that distinct stimulation frequencies
trigger distinct cellular/network processes. More precise insights
into these processes will come with increased knowledge about
both biophysical and neurophysiological effects of stimulation
currents on underlying neuronal systems.
However, the access to cellular and network mechanisms
induced by DBS is rather difficult in animal models of epilepsy
and (almost) impossible in patients especially in large-scale systems like the thalamocortical loop. An alternative approach is
the use of computational models based on physiological data to
first reproduce and then explain changes in cerebral activity as
a function of stimulation conditions (stimulation site, intensity,
and frequency). This is precisely the objective of this study, with a
special focus on the distinct effects of DBS frequency on cortical
epileptic dynamics.
Our investigation combines computational modeling and clinical data. We explored stimulation effects in a lumped-parameter
mesoscopic neural mass model of the thalamacortical loop,
inspired from previously published models (Suffczynski et al.,
2004; Lopes Da Silva, 2006; Roberts and Robinson, 2008; Crunelli
et al., 2011).
Although these models are lumped representations of underlying neuronal systems, they offer a number of advantages in the
context of this study. First, neural mass models include subpopulations of principal excitatory cells and inhibitory interneurons.
Second, these models were shown to produce realistic activity as
observed in LFPs or EEG under normal (Freeman, 1973; Lopes
Da Silva et al., 1974) or epileptic conditions [review in Lytton
(2008); Wendling (2008)]. Third, main parameters (mean membrane potential and firing rate) provide access to the investigation
of several stimulation-induced (patho)physiological mechanisms.
For instance, a neural mass model was successfully used in the
context of direct low-intensity pulse stimulation in the hippocampus to explain the behavior of evoked responses during the
transition to seizures (Suffczynski et al., 2008).
In particular, using this model, we analyzed the neurophysiological effects induced by direct thalamic stimulation on epileptic
cortical dynamics at low frequency (LF, < 20 Hz), intermediate
frequency (IF, 20–70 Hz) and high frequency (HF, 70–130 Hz).
Model parameters were tuned to reproduce a typical pathological
oscillatory activity observed in a neocortical lesion (focal cortical dysplasia, or FCD) in a patient with drug-resistant epilepsy.
Intracerebral EEG (iEEG) signals observed during thalamic stimulation (centromedian nucleus) of this patient revealed particularly pronounced frequency-dependent modulation of the FCD
pathological activity. Therefore, this data set offered the unique
opportunity to identify key model parameters for which such
a frequency-dependent modulation could be reproduced and,

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

subsequently to get insights regarding the mechanisms underlying the modulatory effects, in the FCD, of thalamic stimulation. Results revealed that LFS favors feed-forward inhibition
and short-term depression at the cortical level and that HFS
inhibits the thalamic activity, while IFS reinforces reticulothalamic oscillations thus entraining cortical pathological epileptic
dynamics.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
In this section, we present (1) the neurophysiologically-relevant
computational model that we developed to study thalamic DBS,
(2) the real depth-EEG dataset used for model tuning and, (3)
the signal processing methods used for characterizing real and
simulated EEG signals.
MODEL OF THE THALAMOCORTICAL LOOP

In order to study the effects of thalamic DBS on cortical dynamics,
we implemented a physiologically-plausible mesoscopic model
of the thalamocortical loop. This model accounts for the average activity of both cortical and thalamic compartments which
include various types of neuronal populations interacting via
synaptic transmission. This modeling approach was first proposed in the early 70s (Wilson and Cowan, 1972) and further
enriched in order to interpret electrophysiological recordings and
study brain dynamics, in the olfactory (Freeman, 1973) and the
thalamocortical (Lopes Da Silva et al., 1974) system, for instance,
as well as the dynamics of cortical oscillations (Nunez, 1974). This
approach was then developed by other research groups in the context of state changes in brain dynamics (Wright et al., 1985), visual
evoked potentials (Jansen et al., 1993), dynamics of the human
alpha rhythm (Stam et al., 1999) or pathophysiological mechanisms of ictal transitions in epilepsy (Wendling et al., 2000, 2002;
Suffczynski et al., 2001; Robinson et al., 2002; Liley and Bojak,
2005; Breakspear et al., 2006). Later, neural mass models were
also used in studies dealing with the connectivity among cortical
regions and the impact of model parameters on the power spectrum of EEG or MEG signals (Robinson et al., 1997; David and
Friston, 2003; Zavaglia et al., 2006).
Model architecture

The model architecture was inspired from previously published
models of the thalamocortical loop (Suffczynski et al., 2004; Lopes
Da Silva, 2006; Roberts and Robinson, 2008; Crunelli et al., 2011).
In a global view, the model was built of three interconnected
compartments: a cortical compartment, a thalamic compartment,
and a reticular compartment, in accordance with previously published models (Figure 1A) and with anatomical data (Figure 1B).
Each compartment includes one or several subpopulation(s) of
neurons, either excitatory or inhibitory. Generally speaking, the
input/output functions of a considered subpopulation are represented by two mathematical equations that were respectively
named “pulse-to-wave” (input) and “wave-to-pulse” (output) by
Walter Freeman (Freeman, 1992). The former is a linear transfer
function that converts the presynaptic average density of afferent action potentials into an average postsynaptic membrane
potential (PSP), either excitatory (EPSP) or inhibitory (IPSP).
The output function is a static nonlinear function (sigmoid) that

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 2

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

FIGURE 1 | Model of the thalamocortical loop. (A) The model
architecture comprises three main compartments: cortical, thalamic, and
reticular. The cortical compartment includes three subpopulations: P
(pyramidal principal neurons), I1C (soma- and proximal-dendrite targeting
interneurons mediating GABAA, fast currents), and I2C , (dendrite-targeting
interneurons mediating GABAA, slow currents). The thalamic compartment
represents a generic thalamic nucleus including a subpopulation of
excitatory thalamocortical (TC) cells. The reticular nucleus (RtN)

provides the average pulse density of action potentials fired by
neurons depending on the sum of EPSPs and IPSPs at the input.
This non-linear function accounts for threshold and saturation
effects that take place at the somas and initial axonal segments of
considered cells.
Formally, the input function is represented by a second order
low-pass filter H(s) = W/(s+1/τw )2 (where s is the Laplace
variable). The impulse response of this filter is given by
h(t) =

W
· t · e−t/τw
τw

(1)

Parameters W and τw are tuned such that h(t) approximates the shape of real excitatory (glutamatergic) or inhibitory
(GABAergic) postsynaptic potentials (Lopes Da Silva et al., 1976).
The quantity W.τ2w is the static gain of filter h. Lumped parameter τw (expressed in s) is linked to the kinetics of synaptic
currents. It determines both the rise time (trise = τw ) and the
decay time (tdecay = 3.146τw ) of the second order filter impulse
response h and it is usually adjusted with respect to the physiological rise and decay times of actual PSPs (Molaee-Ardekani
et al., 2010). Given the time constantτw , parameter W can be used
to adjust the sensitivity of synapses (the maximal PSP amplitude
is W.e−1 ). An alternative implementation of the h function was
introduced in Bojak and Liley (2005) and is described in detail
in Molaee-Ardekani et al. (2013). It is based on a bi-exponential
pulse-to-wave function with two time constant parameters. This
implementation allows for the separate adjustment of the rise
and decay times of PSPs, and therefore a better approximation of
actual PSPs in some circumstances. Besides, the output function

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

compartment is made up of two GABAergic neuronal populations
(I1Rt , GABAA, fast currents and I2Rt , GABAA, slow ). Excitatory synaptic
transmission among the considered subpopulations is glutamatergic
(GLU). (B) Anatomical connectivity of the CMN, PMC, and RtN. This
diagram represents the anatomy of a particular thalamocortical loop
interconnecting the CM thalamic nucleus, the PMC, and the RtN.
Connectivity patterns were inferred from the literature. It is compatible
with the thalamocortical model diagram presented in (A).

2e0
, where 2e0 is the maximum firis represented by S(v) =
1+er(v0 −v)
ing rate, v0 is the postsynaptic potential corresponding to a firing
rate of e0 and r is the steepness of the sigmoid.

The cortical compartment

The cortical compartment was inspired from an existing model
of the neocortex which proved its capability of generating both
normal and epileptiform activity. Readers may refer to MolaeeArdekani et al. (2010) for details. In brief, the cortical compartment integrates a subpopulation of pyramidal cells (P, W =
AC , τw = τac in Equation 1) and two inhibitory neuronal populations (I1c and I2c , Figure 1A) representing soma- and proximaldendrite targeting interneurons (GABAA, fast currents, W =
GC , τw = τgc in Equation 1) and dendrite-targeting interneurons (GABAA, slow currents, W = BC , τw = τbc in Equation 1),
respectively. Pyramidal collateral excitation was implemented as
in Jansen et al. (1993).
In addition, these three cortical subpopulations receive excitatory input from the thalamic compartment. Therefore, feedforward inhibition (FFI) is represented in the model as the two
subpopulations of interneurons project to the pyramidal subpopulation (see The Thalamic and Reticular Compartments paragraph
below).
Short-term synaptic depression (STD)

STD is present in the neocortex (Boudreau and Ferster, 2005). It
can be potentially involved in the context of direct stimulation
of the thalamus as TC cells directly project to cortical pyramidal cells. Consequently, this mechanism was implemented at the
interface of thalamic/cortical compartments. To our knowledge,

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 3

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

an implementation of STD in neural mass models has not been
proposed before.
In our model, we represented a modulatory effect of the
amplitude of the average EPSP (parameter AC ’) at the level of
subpopulation P depending on the density of action potentials
[dAP (t)] coming from the thalamic compartment. This modulatory effect was obtained by multiplying AC ’ by a time-varying
coefficient κ(t) ∈ [0.6, 1] where the function describing the evolution of κ(t) was derived from Chung et al. (2002). This study
shows that: (i) cortical EPSPs drop by 40% under periodic lowfrequency intense thalamocortical (TC) cell firing and, (ii) this
drop in cortical EPSP is directly linked to transient depression of
thalamocortical monosynaptic projections to pyramidal neurons.
In line with these observations, STD was implemented as fol(t)
lows. First, signal dAP is low-pass filtered (cutoff frequency =
10 Hz) to restrict the STD effect to LFS. Then, from each time tη at
f
which the filtered signal dAP (t) exceeds a firing rate equal to η, the
κ(t) coefficient undertakes an exponential decay given by κ(t) =
κη · e−t/τ where κη = κ(tη− ) and where tη− is the time instant that
just precedes tη . The decrease of κ(t) is limited to the time interval [tη + 0.45 s] and cannot exceed 40%, total. Parameters η and
τ were set to 0.8 and 8 s, respectively.
The thalamic and reticular compartments

The thalamic compartment was limited to one population of excitatory neurons (known as glutamatergic thalamocortical - TC
- cells) receiving glutamatergic EPSPs (W = ATh , τw = τaTh in
Equation 1) from cortical pyramidal cells (P) and GABAergic
IPSPs with slow (W = BTh , τw = τbTh in Equation 1) and fast
(W = GTh , τw = τgTh in Equation 1) kinetics from the reticular
compartment (RtN). Here, we increased the time constant (τbTh )
with respect to τbc to account for both GABAA, slow - and GABAB receptor mediated currents in a single variable. TC cells directly
target both cortical pyramidal cells and interneurons. The activation of these GABAergic interneurons subsequently promotes
inhibition of pyramidal cells after a di-synaptic delay. Therefore,
TC cells activation induces first an EPSP followed later on by an
IPSP on cortical pyramidal cells, resulting in feed-forward inhibition (FFI). The RtN compartment comprised two inhibitory subpopulations, namely I1RT and I2RT which both receive excitatory
input from the cortical (W = ARt , τw = τaRt in Equation 1) and
the thalamic (W = ARt , τw = τaRt in Equation 1) compartments.
Simulation of stimulation effects

Stimulation currents induce a perturbation of the membrane
potential of neurons. At cellular level, this effect can be accounted
for by the “λE model”, which is well grounded in the biophysics of compartment models (Rattay, 1998; McIntyre et al.,
2004a; Manola et al., 2005, 2007) (see Miranda et al., 2009 for
a review) and supported by in vitro experiments (Bikson et al.,
2004; Frohlich and McCormick, 2010). This model V ≈ λ.E
approximates the membrane potential variation V as a linear
function of the electrical field E induced by stimulation (λ representing the membrane space constant). In our neural mass model,
the situation is less straightforward as space is not explicitly represented, conversely to detailed or mean-field models. However,
within a certain range of intensity values, it has been shown that

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

the membrane potential variation V is modified in a linear way
with respect to the electrical field which is itself proportional
to the stimulation intensity (Bikson et al., 2004). These considerations led us to also assume a linear variation for the mean
membrane potential as a function of stimulation intensity, in
stimulated sub-populations of neurons. In addition, stimulation
was represented by a train of periodic monophasic depolarizing
pulses. The pulse width was fixed to 1 ms (as in clinics). Pulses
were low-pass filtered to account for the average time of repolarization (set to 4.8 ms) in stimulated sub-populations of cells. The
resulting stimulation signal was added to the mean membrane
potential of neuronal sub-populations included in the thalamic
(TC) and reticular (I1RT and I2RT ) compartments of the proposed
model. The depolarizing effect was weighted by three coefficients
STC , SRt1 and SRt2 (Table 1) accounting for the possibly different
stimulation impact at the thalamic and reticular level.
Model parameters, outputs, and implementation

Parameter values as well as physiological interpretation are provided in Table 1. Note that each synaptic connection in the model
is weighted by a connectivity constant denoted by CSP1−SP2 where
SP1 and SP2, respectively, denote the source and target subpopulations. In addition, two Gaussian noise inputs pP (t)∼ N(μP , σP )
and pTC (t)∼ N(μTC , σTC ) were used to represent nonspecific
inputs on pyramidal and thalamocortical cell subpopulations.
Finally, signals simulated at the level of pyramidal cells in the
cortical compartment and at the level of TC cells in the thalamic
compartment were chosen as model outputs. They correspond
to the sum of PSPs at each compartment respectively. The temporal dynamics of these signals provide a good approximation
of actual LFPs. The model was implemented in Simulink®,
and all other complementary scripts were implemented
in MATLAB®.
REAL DATA FOR MODEL TUNING

We used real clinical data to tune the model into a functioning mode which simulates pathological activity. The clinical data set was limited to a unique patient who underwent
thalamic DBS during the presurgical intracerebral EEG exploration (iEEG performed with depth electrodes implanted under
stereotaxic conditions) at the Epilepsy Surgery Unit, Rennes
University Hospital. This particular patient was chosen for
two main reasons: (1) the pronounced frequency-dependent
stimulation effects observed during his preoperative diagnostic iEEG exploration at LF, IF and HF in addition to (2) the
existence of an epileptogenic zone in a limited area of the
premotor cortex (PMC).
In brief, this patient suffered from partial drug-resistant
epilepsy since the age of two. MRI scans and EEG recordings
pointed out the existence of a neuronal malformation known
as FCD in the PMC at the origin of seizures. This type of
cortical malformation is known for its epileptogenic features
like neuronal hyperexcitability and hypersynchronization and its
characteristic epileptiform discharges (continuous, rhythmic or
semirhythmic spikes, and polyspikes) (Avoli et al., 2003; Palmini,
2010) as shown in Figure 2C. Based on various clinical studies reporting the modulation of epileptic cortical activity by the

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 4

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

Table 1 | Model parameters, values and interpretation.
Parameter

Value

Interpretation

AC

6 (optimized, pathological)
3 (normal) mV

Amplitude of the cortical average EPSP

AC ’

κ(t).AC mV

Amplitude of the cortical average EPSP in response to thalamic input (only on
subpopulation P)

BC

14 (optimized, pathological)
50 (normal) mV

Amplitude of the cortical average IPSP (GABAA,slow mediated currents)

GC

16.5 (optimized,
pathological)
22 (normal) mV

Amplitude of the cortical average IPSP (GABAA,fast mediated currents)

ATh

3.5 mV

Amplitude of the thalamic average EPSP

BTh

30 mV

Amplitude of the thalamic average IPSP (GABAA,slow and GABAB receptors)

GTh

22 mV

Amplitude of the thalamic average IPSP (GABAA,fast receptors)

ARt

3.5 mV

Amplitude of the reticular average EPSP

τac

1/80 s

Time constant of cortical glutamate-mediated synaptic transmission.

τbc

1/35 s

Time constant of cortical GABA-mediated synaptic transmission (GABAA, slow receptors)
Time constant of cortical GABA-mediated synaptic transmission (GABAA, fast receptors)

τgc

1/180 s

τaTh

1/100 s

Time constant of thalamic glutamate-mediated synaptic transmission

τbTh

1/20 s

Time constant of thalamic GABA-mediated synaptic transmission (GABAA, slow and
GABAB receptors)

τgTh

1/150 s

Time constant of thalamic GABA-mediated synaptic transmission (GABAA, fast receptors)

τaRt

1/100 s

Time constant of reticular glutamate-mediated synaptic transmission

ν0 , e0 , r

ν0 = 6mV, e0 = 2.5 s−1
r = 0.56mV−1

Parameters of the nonlinear sigmoid function (transforming the average membrane
potential to an average density of action potentials)

CP−P

135

Collateral excitation connectivity constant

CP −P

108

Collateral excitation connectivity constant

CP−I C

33.75

P to I2C connectivity constant

CI C −P

33.75

I2C to P connectivity constant

CP−I C

40.5

P to I1C connectivity constant

CI C −I C

13.5

I1C to I2C connectivity constant

CI C −P

91.125

I1C to P connectivity constant

CTC−P

120

TC to P connectivity constant

CTC−I C

30

TC to I1C connectivity constant

CTC−I C

45

TC to I2C connectivity constant

CTC−I Rt

20

TC to I1Rt connectivity constant

CTC−I Rt

20

TC to I2Rt connectivity constant

CP−I Rt

30

P to I1Rt connectivity constant

CP−I Rt

30

P to I2Rt connectivity constant

CP−TC

20

P to TC connectivity constant

CI Rt −TC

35

I1Rt to TC connectivity constant

CI Rt −TC

5

I2Rt to TC connectivity constant

μP1

0

Mean of nonspecific cortical input

μP2

70

Mean of nonspecific subcortical input

σP1

20.v6

Standard deviation of nonspecific cortical input

σP2

35.v6

Standard deviation of nonspecific subcortical input

STC

5

Stimulation impact on subpopulation TC

SRt1

4

Stimulation impact on subpopulation I1Rt

SRt2

4

Stimulation impact on subpopulation I2Rt

fs

1Hz – 150Hz

Frequency of the stimulation signal (pulse train)

Afs

1

Stimulation signal amplitude

2

2

1

2

1

1

1
2
1
2

1
2

1
2

Model parameters used to reproduce LFPsFCD . Stimulation impact parameters STC , SRt1 and SRt2 are set to zero during the simulation of the NS scenario. These
parameters are held constant for all other stimulation scenarios.

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 5

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

signals corresponding to either typical pathological activity or
modulated activity (depending on stimulation conditions) were
used to optimize the model parameters.
PROCESSING OF REAL AND SIMULATED SIGNALS

FIGURE 2 | Frequency-dependent stimulation effects: real data. iEEG
signals recorded during presurgical depth-EEG exploration in a patient with
drug-resistant epilepsy. (A) MRI data showing the FCD (focal cortical
dysplasia in the PMC) and the electrode trajectory. The red dot marks the
position of the depth electrode in the FCD. (B) Zoom on the FCD. (C) DBS
of the CMN modulated the pathological activity of the FCD in a
frequency-dependent manner. LFS (2 Hz) and HFS (≥70 Hz) suppressed
pathological oscillations. IFS (50 Hz) had no effects.

stimulation of the CM nucleus (Velasco et al., 1995, 1997, 2000,
2001, 2007), it was decided by neurologists and neursosurgeons to
implant a depth electrode in this nucleus, as potentially beneficial
for the patient who gave his informed consent.
During the presurgical exploration, the stimulation of the thalamic CM nucleus (CMN) induced frequency-dependent modulation of the pathologic activity of the FCD (Figure 2). Readers
may refer to (Pasnicu et al., 2013) for detailed information.
Interestingly, LFS (2 Hz, 4 mA) and HFS (70, 100, and 150 Hz,
0.8 mA) desynchronized the pathological activity of the FCD,
while IFS (50 Hz, 0.8 mA) barely affected it. These segments of

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

The use of signal processing techniques was necessary (i) to
quantify the above-described effects of stimulation in real iEEG
signals, and (ii) to define a feature-vector-based cost function for
model parameter optimization. Figure 3A illustrates the feature
extraction methodology. iEEG signals recorded in the FCD in
absence of stimulation (LFPsFCD ) and under different stimulation
conditions were decomposed using an orthogonal matching pursuit algorithm [matching pursuit toolkit—MPTK—(Krstulovic
and Gribonval, 2006)]. First introduced in 1993 (Mallat and
Zhifeng, 1993), matching pursuit is signal processing algorithm
used to decompose any time series into a linear sum of waveforms selected from a predefined dictionary based on a mother
wavelet. To proceed, a proper multi-scalar dictionary of Gabor,
Fourier, and Dirac atoms was first defined to account for real
iEEG signal components (time-frequency atoms are waveforms
well localized in both the time and the frequency domains). In line
with (Krstulovic and Gribonval, 2006), the multi-scalar dictionary was formed by translation in time and amplitude/frequency
modulation of atoms (defined as Gabor and Fourier functions
in our case), over ten different user-defined time scales (i.e. the
atom durations, ranging from 0.125 to 5 s). Then, the algorithm
provided a table of time-frequency parameters associated to the
detected atoms (atom type, central frequency, phase, scale, amplitude, position). Identified atoms were reconstructed using the
extracted parameter table and their analytical expression. They
were then associated to a given frequency band depending on
their central frequency. These frequency bands corresponded to
the classical EEG bands as defined in normal adults (δ1 [0 –
1.9Hz], δ2 [1.9 – 3.4 Hz], θ1 [3.4 – 5.4 Hz], θ2 [5.4 – 7.4 Hz], α1
[7.4 – 10 Hz], α2 [10 – 12 Hz], β1 [12 –18 Hz], β2 [18 – 24 Hz],
γ [24 – 128 Hz]) (Figure 3A, blue). Finally, a 9D feature vector
VF was defined from the normalized energy distribution in these
frequency bands, itself computed as the sum of averaged (over
time) atom energies relative to the total signal energy (Figure 3A,
green).
MODEL OPTIMIZATION UNDER THE “NO STIMULATION” CONDITION

In order to simulate LFPsFCD , we optimized the excitation/inhibition ratio of the cortical compartment. Thus, the
average EPSP/IPSP amplitude parameters of the cortical compartment {AC , BC , GC } were considered as free parameters
while all other model parameters were set to fixed values
(Table 1). The optimization method is illustrated in Figure 3B.
For each triplet {AC , BC , GC }, the feature vector VF, model of
the model’s output signal (cortical compartment’s LFP) was calculated and compared to VF, real , i.e., the feature vector computed from the average of the 20 feature vectors, each computed on a 5 s signal segment of real LFPsFCD . Feature vectors
VF, model and VF, real were computed as described in section
Processing of Real and Simulated Signals. The optimization procedure aimed at finding the triplet A C , B C , GC that minimizes a cost function simply corresponding to the Euclidean

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 6

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

FIGURE 3 | iEEG signal processing. (A) Feature vector extraction. Input
signals were characterized using the matching pursuit (MP) method
(dictionary of Gabor, Fourier, and Dirac atoms). Parameters of detected atoms
(atom type, central frequency fc , scale, phase, amplitude, and position) are
extracted by MP from input signals. Detected atoms are then associated with
frequency bands (δ1 to γ) depending on their proper central frequency.
Sub-band (δ1 to γ) signals were reconstructed from the sum of corresponding

distance d(VF, real , VF, model ) when parameters AC , BC , and GC
span pre-defined ranges of values according to a Brute-Force
procedure.

RESULTS
In this section, results regarding the identification of cellular mechanisms underlying the modulation of cortical activity
by thalamic DBS are reported. First, the model capability to
reproduce signals similar to those recorded from the FCD in
the patient was assessed, under two conditions (no stimulation and during stimulation). Three mechanisms contributing
to frequency-dependant stimulation effects could be identified.
Then, simulations were performed to analyze the marginal or
joint contribution of these mechanisms at low, intermediate or
high frequency stimulation.

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

atoms, themselves obtained by fitting parameters into their analytic
expression (see top left: input and reconstructed signals). The normalized
energy vector [E(δ1 ) . . . E(γ)]/(E(δ1 ) + . . . + E(γ)] was chosen as the feature
vector for further optimization of model parameters. (B) The model’s free
parameters AC , BC , and GC were optimized by minimizing the distance
between the feature vector VF, model of the simulated cortical LFP and the
average of real feature vectors VF, real of LFPsFCD .

SIMULATION OF LFPsFCD UNDER NO STIMULATION CONDITION

As a first step, we verified the ability of the model to generate signals that resemble those recorded from the FCD in
the considered patient (LFPsFCD ). This procedure, described in
sections Processing of Real and Simulated Signals and Model
Optimization Under the “No Stimulation” Condition, led us to
identify a minimal distance (Figures 4A–C) and thus an optimal
parameter vector A C , B C , GC = {6, 14, 16.5} for which simulated signals under the no stimulation condition have similar
features as compared with those of real signals (Figure 4D).
SIMULATION OF LFPsFCD UNDER STIMULATION CONDITIONS

Actual LFPsFCD recorded at various stimulation frequencies (2,
50, 70, 100, and 150 Hz) were first characterized using the
matching pursuit method described in section Processing of

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 7

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

FIGURE 4 | Model parameter optimization. Normalized Euclidian
distance between VE, real and VE, model . Best fit (gray disk) between
simulated and real LFPsFCD was obtained for (A) AC = 6, (B) BC = 14,
and (C) GC = 16.5. (D) For these modified values of excitation and

Real and Simulated Signals (Figure 3A). Results are shown in
Figure 5A where feature vectors of segments of LFPsFCD are
represented in a 3D space where axes correspond to merged typical EEG frequency bands (δ2 to θ1 , θ2 to β1 , β2 to γ). Results
show that the distribution of points in the 3D frequency space
is not random but clustered, indicating that the frequency content of LFPsFCD segments depends on the stimulation frequency.
In addition, some clusters are very close. This is typically the
case for i) the no stimulation (yellow) and the 50 Hz stimulation conditions (red) on the one hand, and ii) the 70 Hz (violet)
and 150 Hz (cyan) stimulation conditions on the other hand.
To go beyond the qualitative clustering performed by visual
inspection of 3D plots, a K-means clustering algorithm implemented in MATLAB and using a Mahalanobis distance was used
to automatically detect the three types of stimulation effects.
Initial centroids were randomly chosen. The optimal clustering that globally minimizes intra-cluster inertia is presented in
Figure 5B. LFPsFCD segments were automatically classified into
three subgroups. The first subgroup contains LFPsFCD segments
obtained for low-frequency stimulation (LFS). The second subgroup gathers all segments recorded for high frequency stimulations (HFS, > 70 Hz). And finally, in the third subgroup,
segments obtained under the no stimulation and the intermediate stimulation frequency (IFS, 50 Hz) conditions are merged

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

inhibition, the simulated signal exhibits similar characteristics as the iEEG
signal recorded in the FCD. For standard values of excitation and
inhibition (AC = 3, BC = 50, GC = 22), the model generates background
EEG activity.

together, suggesting that this stimulation frequency does not
reduce the “epileptiform aspect” of the activity reflected in the
LFP.
Based on this characterization of local field potentials recorded
in the FCD (LFPsFCD ), parameters STC , SRt1 and SRt2 were manually tuned to lead the model to generate simulated signals which
have spectral characteristics similar to those of actual LFPsFCD .
Such a manual procedure was sufficient to reproduce stimulation
effects observed in one patient. However, extending the study to
a larger group of patients would have made imperative an automated parameter fitting procedure based on the spectral characteristics of real EEG signals as in Rowe et al. (2004). Figure 5B
shows the projection of representative simulated LFPsFCD in the
3D frequency space (“M” triangles). As depicted, simulated signals obtained for LFS, IFS and HFS were close to corresponding
clusters obtained from real signals for the exact same computation
of feature vectors. Shown in Figure 5C, these representatives simulated LFPsFCD do not perfectly match actual signals. However,
qualitatively similar bifurcations were observed in the model
when the stimulation conditions are changed. Indeed, under the
no stimulation (NS) and the IFS condition the model generates
rhythmic slow oscillations (δ) with superimposed faster activity
(β, γ), as observed in real data. For LFS and HFS conditions,
strong modulation of this activity was also obtained in the model.

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 8

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

FIGURE 5 | Characterization and classification of real and simulated
data. (A) 3-dimensional (3D) projection of feature vectors (VF, real )
corresponding to different stimulation conditions. This projection was
obtained by summing some coordinates of initial 9D feature vectors to
get 3D vectors [E(δ2 )+E(θ1 ), E(θ2 )+E(α1 )+E(α2 )+E(β1 ),
E(β2 )+E(γ)]/ [E(δ1 )+ · · · + E(γ)]. Each vector was then represented by a
point in the 3D space (δ2 +θ1 , θ2 + α1 + α2 + β1 , β2 + γ).Three main
classes can be visually identified. (B) Clusters obtained using the

At LFS, in the model, the slow wave activity was strongly reduced
but spike events occurred in the signals at the instant times of
stimulation, mimicking, to some extent, comparable events also
present in actual LFPsFCD . Finally, at HFS, slow oscillations (δ)
were abolished in the model which generates quasi-normal background activity. This simulated activity was also comparable to
real activity observed for HFS stimulation but disclosed less γ
activity. Note that these are the effects which were quantified in
Figure 5B. The qualitative optimization procedure of parameters STC , SRt1 , and SRt2 was then complemented by an evaluation
of parameter sensitivity aimed at studying the impact of random changes affecting the parameter vector = {AC , BC , GC ,
ATh , BTh , GTh , ARt } on simulated signals. Parameter vector
determines the excitability properties in the three model compartments. As shown in Figure 6, results show that the simulated
signals obtained under the four stimulation conditions (NS, LFS,
IFS, HFS) stay “quite robust” (in the sense that waveforms are
conserved) when parameters stay in the range [
0 ≤ ζ ≤ 0.2.

± ζ.

] with

MECHANISMS UNDERLYING FREQUENCY-DEPENDANT STIMULATION
EFFECTS

Three main mechanisms implemented in the model are required
to mimic actually observed effects of the CM nucleus stimulation. These mechanisms are the following: (i) the presence of
feed-forward inhibition (FFI) at the level of thalamic projections

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

k-means algorithm (Mahalanobis distance). The three clusters correspond
to (i) low-frequency stimulation (LFS) effects (green squares), (ii) no
stimulation (NS) and intermediate-frequency stimulation (IFS) effects
(yellow squares), and (iii) high-frequency stimulation (HFS) effects (blue
squares). Simulated signals corresponding to the four types of scenarios
(NS, LFS, IFS, and HFS) were also projected in the same space
(triangles). (C) Two-second segments of real and simulated signal during
NS, LFS, IFS, and HFS.

to the FCD, (ii) the presence of short-term depression (STD) at
the level of the thalamocortical glutamatergic synapses and, (iii)
the depolarization of RtN inhibitory interneurons targeting TC
cells.
This result raises an additional question: to what extent
the joint effect of these mechanisms is necessary to reproduce
frequency-dependant stimulation effects (LFS, IFS, and HFS).
In order to assess their individual contribution, we performed
simulations where each mechanism was either present in—or
removed from—the model (the model parameters remaining
unchanged). Results are displayed in Figure 7. First, they confirmed that both FFI and STD mechanisms are jointly necessary in the model to suppress the epileptic activity in the
FCD when LFS is being used since the withdrawal of either
STD or FFI leads the model to generate epileptic activity at
LFS. Second, results indicated that the RtN inhibitory interneurons targeting TC cells (both I1RT and I2RT subpopulations)
must be affected (i.e., depolarized) by the stimulation to obtain
a suppression of epileptic activity when HFS is being used,
as observed in the patient. Third, and interestingly, an unexpected effect was observed at IFS when the depolarization of
I2RT interneurons was removed from the model. Indeed, epileptic activity was abolished in this case, which is really unlikely
to occur during actual stimulation as both subtypes of neurons
are expected to be affected by the direct stimulation of the CM
nucleus.

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 9

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

FIGURE 6 | Evaluation of parameter sensitivity. Model output sensitivity to
variations of excitatory and inhibitory key parameters. Realizations of
parameter vector = {AC , BC , GC , ATh , BTh , GTh , ARt } were randomly
(uniform law) generated around the optimal parameter vector 0 over a

These results were complemented by a deeper analysis of the
thalamic output (i.e., the firing rate of TC cells) in response to
stimulation at low, intermediate and high frequency. Results are
provided in Figure 8. First, they showed that the thalamic output dramatically differs depending on the stimulation frequency
(Figure 8A). Under the no stimulation condition, the firing rate
continuously oscillates around a certain value (referred to as
, Figure 8A). At LFS, the firing rate was found to be lower,
except at the stimulation times where it abruptly and transiently
increased. At IFS, a balance was observed between time intervals for which the TC firing is above and below . Finally, at
HFS, the output of TC cells was found to be very low, i.e., systematically under the threshold . From these observations, we
could define (i) two time intervals, 1 and 2, for which the
TC cells firing rate is either below ( 1) or above
( 2)
and (ii) a “high to low firing” ratio (HtoLR) which provides
an indication on the amount of time the TC cells spend firing (up state) relatively to the amount of time they do not fire
(down state). Figure 8B provides the evolution of the HtoLR
when the stimulation frequency is progressively changing from 0
to 150 Hz in the model. As depicted, these simulations indicated
that three stimulation frequency ranges have dramatic effects on
the firing of TC cells. First, from 0 to 20 Hz, the down state

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

variation domain defined by (1 ±ζ). 0 . For ζ ≤ 0.2 (±20% variation),
stimulation effects are preserved in the model for (A) no stimulation,
(B) low-frequency stimulation, (C) intermediate-frequency stimulation, and
(D) high-frequency stimulation.

is predominant. Then, an abrupt jump was observed around
22 Hz indicating that beyond this value, the firing rate dramatically increased. Interestingly, from 55 to 65 Hz, a progressive
decrease of the HtoLR was observed. Then, after 70 Hz, the ratio
is equal to zero indicating that TC cells did not fire anymore.
Finally, in order to relate the thalamic activity with the cortical activity, we plotted the phase portraits (TC cell firing vs.
cortical LFP) as illustrated in Figure 8C. Results confirmed the
visual inspection of signals simulated at the two sites. For the
no stimulation (NS) and for the intermediate frequency stimulation (IFS) conditions, phase portraits were found to be quite
similar. They indicated the presence of mixed slow/fast oscillations in both signals. For the low frequency stimulation (LFS)
condition, oscillations in the simulated LFP in the FCD were
reduced. They came along with short-duration, abrupt and rhythmic augmentations of the TC firing corresponding to stimulation
pulses. Finally, for the high frequency stimulation (HFS) condition, oscillations in both types of activity stayed confined to small
amplitude values.

DISCUSSION
We modeled the thalamocortical loop in order to investigate
frequency-dependent effects of electrical stimulation performed

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 10

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

FIGURE 7 | Conditions to reproduce frequency-dependent
stimulation effects. Model output in the case where one of the
implemented mechanisms (FFI, STD, depolarization of I2Rt , and I1Rt „
respectively) is removed at a time. LFS effects are not reproduced
when the model does not account for FFI and STD. HFS effects

in the thalamus and aimed at modulating the neocortical activity. We chose to elaborate our model at a mesoscopic level, i.e.,
intermediate between microsocopic and macroscopic.
Regarding the model architecture, we followed a similar
approach to that used in previously proposed models of the thalamocortical loop (Robinson et al., 2002; Suffczynski et al., 2004;
Breakspear et al., 2006; Roberts and Robinson, 2008; Marten et al.,
2009; Crunelli et al., 2011). Our model includes three main compartments: cerebral cortex, reticular nucleus and thalamic relay.
Subpopulations of neurons and interneurons located in these
three structures interact via excitatory and/or inhibitory synaptic
connections. The novelty with respect to aforementioned studies is threefold. First, we modified the cortical compartment in
order to better approximate the temporal dynamics of epileptic
signals recorded in the FCD. This modification consisted in the
use of two types of interneurons (mediating GABAergic IPSPs
with slow and fast kinetics on cortical principal cells), as reported
in a previous study (Molaee-Ardekani et al., 2010). Second, our
model accounts for the direct effects of electrical stimulation. At
this stage, we used the V ≈ λ.E assumption according to which
the perturbation of the mean membrane potential of neurons
is a linear function of the electrical field magnitude induced by
bipolar stimulation. This “λE” assumption was already used in
neural mass models in the context of low-intensity direct hippocampal stimulation to anticipate seizures (Suffczynski et al.,
2008) as well as in the analysis of the stimulus-response relationship of DBS in healthy animals (Adhikari et al., 2009). However,
it is worth mentioning that in our model, the three subtypes of
neurons (TC cells and both subpopulations of inhibitory neurons
in the RtN) are depolarized by the stimulation, as suggested in

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

require the depolarization of both reticular populations I2Rt and I1Rt .
Suppression of epileptic activity is observed at IFS when I2Rt
interneurons are removed. Red dotted lines indicate situations where
simulated signals do not match real ones for given stimulation
condition.

(Molaee-Ardekani et al., 2013) and conversely to (Adhikari et al.,
2009) where only principal cells are impacted. And third, our
model includes two well-known mechanisms at the cortical level:
feed-forward inhibition (FFI) and short-term depression (STD).
As in any modeling approach, our approach has some limitations. First, the chosen modeling level does not allow for analyzing
sub-cellular mechanisms involved in stimulation-evoked changes.
Similarly, it does not account for direct activation of axons by
stimulation versus somatic inhibition (McIntyre et al., 2004b),
nor for the mechanisms of orthodromic/antidromic propagation of action potentials due to stimulation (Degos et al., 2005;
Hammond et al., 2007; Dorval et al., 2008). Second, a strong
assumption in the type of model we used (neural mass) is related
to the intrinsic synchronization among neurons included in a
given sub-population. This assumption does not allow for representing either de- or weakly-synchronized firing patterns that
may be observed during epileptic activity, in particular during
high frequency oscillations that can be encountered in FCDs
(Brázdil et al., 2010). Nevertheless, we could accurately reproduce the abnormal rhythms generated in the FCD suggesting that
main pyramidal cells have a relatively synchronized activity in
this epileptogenic tissue. Third, regarding plasticity-related mechanisms, we only implemented short-term effects (i.e., STD) and
neglected long-term plastic changes that may be induced by DBS
(Shukla et al., 2013).
Despite these limitations, we could identify a number of
mesoscopic factors which could explain the frequency-dependent
mechanisms of thalamic stimulation. The model was tuned using
electrophysiological data recorded in a patient in whom the centromedian nucleus (CMN) stimulation was particularly efficient

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 11

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

FIGURE 8 | Model behavior as a function of the stimulation
frequency. (A) The firing rate of TC cells depends on the
stimulation frequency ( 1 : time interval for which this firing is
lower than a threshold
,
2 : time interval for which this firing is

to reduce the epileptic activity of a FCD located in the premotor cortex, in a frequency-specific manner. The main findings are
summarized in Figure 9.

higher than
). (B) Evolution of the “High to Low firing Ratio”
(HtoLR) as a function of stimulation frequency. (C) Phase portraits
(FCD activity vs. CM firing) for the four stimulation conditions (NS,
LFS, IFS, and HFS).

pathological oscillations resembling those actually recorded in the
FCD (Figure 9A).
LOW-FREQUENCY STIMULATION (LFS) CONDITION

“NO STIMULATION” (NS) CONDITION

In the model, under the NS condition, excitation among pyramidal cells had to be increased and inhibition had to be reduced
in the cortical compartment for producing “pathological” oscillatory rhythms, as observed in the FCD. The thalamocortical loop
was found to be responsible for these pathological dynamics,
characteristic of FCDs. These findings are in line with histological studies showing that these typical oscillations are generated in
altered brain tissue, where inhibition is partially deteriorated or
dysfunctioning (Calcagnotto et al., 2005), and where excitation is
heavily increased (Avoli et al., 2003). In addition to neuron alterations in the dysplastic tissue (Sisodiya et al., 2009), FCD keeps
sufficient projections to—and input from—other brain structures to propagate pathological dynamics (Avoli et al., 2003). As
mentioned, the presence of connections with subcortical structures was a necessary condition in the model for producing

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

For the low-frequency stimulation (LFS, f < 20 Hz) condition,
two mechanisms were found to play a major role for the abortion of epileptic activity in the FCD: short-term depression (STD,
i.e., decreased excitatory synaptic efficacy in thalamus-to-cortex
connections) and feed-forward inhibition (FFI, i.e., excitation of
inhibitory cortical interneurons by TC cells) (Figure 9B).
STD was reported in previous studies concerning cortical
adaptation to thalamic stimulation, and suggesting that electrical
LFS of TC cell axons in vivo resulted in a 40% reduction in cortical EPSPs (Chung et al., 2002). In the same context, LFS trains
in adult anaesthetized rats provoked transient long-term depression of thalamocortical synapses; this was measured by up to 40%
drop in cortical EPSPs after LFS trains and under the effect of
GABA antagonist (Speechley et al., 2007).
As mentioned above, the LFS effects could not be reproduced by the model without incorporating also FFI. Actually,

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 12

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

FIGURE 9 | Frequency-dependent mechanisms underlying DBS. (A)
Under the no stimulation (NS) condition, the thalamocortical loop is
responsible for pathological oscillatory rhythms observed in the FCD. (B) For
low-frequency stimulation (LFS), feed-forward inhibition (FFI, i.e., excitation of
inhibitory cortical interneurons by TC cells) and short-term depression (STD,
i.e., decreased excitatory synaptic efficacy in thalamus-to-cortex connections)
was found to play a major role for the abortion of epileptic activity in the FCD.

thalamocortical ascending fibers directly target pyramidal neurons as well as cortical GABAergic interneurons inducing EPSPs
in both cell types (Pouille and Scanziani, 2001). In the model,
while less efficient (STD) thalamic EPSPs arrive directly onto
pyramidal neurons, IPSPs induced by thalamic stimulation also
arrive on pyramidal neurons (FFI) lagging by 1–2 ms. This short
latency between the onset of thalamocortical excitation and
the onset of feed-forward inhibition presents a temporal “window of opportunity” for pyramidal cells to integrate excitatory
and inhibitory inputs, thus keeping the transmembrane potential below firing threshold. In the literature, neuroanatomical
and neurophysiological studies (Isaacson and Scanziani, 2011)
showed the functional importance of FFI in regulating cortical dynamics by controlling cortical excitability (Gabernet et al.,
2005). Our study suggests that LFS regulates cortical excitability
by a dual mechanism of FFI and STD (Figure 9B).
INTERMEDIATE-FREQUENCY STIMULATION (IFS) CONDITION

For the intermediate-frequency stimulation (IFS, 20 <
f < 70 Hz) condition, results indicated that the thalamic
output is reinforced (increase of TC cells firing) and leads to an
increase of the average excitatory post-synaptic potential (EPSP)
on cortical pyramidal cells (Figure 9C). This effect corresponds
to an increase of the spatiotemporal summation of unitary
EPSPs. In this case, both the cortical excitability and the gain in
the excitatory thalamocortical loop is increased, leading to “no
anti-epileptic” effect. We did not find much studies using DBS
stimulation in the intermediate frequency range of (20–60 Hz) in
the context of epilepsy. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that 50 Hz
stimulation frequency is classically used during the presurgical
evaluation of patient with intractable partial epilepsy in order to

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

(C) For the intermediate-frequency stimulation (IFS) condition, thalamic
output is reinforced (increase of TC cells firing) leading to an increase of the
average excitatory post-synaptic potential (EPSP) on cortical pyramidal cells
and to no “anti-epileptic” effect. (D) For high-frequency stimulation (HFS), the
direct and sustained excitation of reticular nucleus (RtN) interneurons leads
to dramatic decrease of TC cells firing rate and to a suppression of epileptic
activity.

trigger seizures and delineate the epileptogenic zone (Talairach
et al., 1974; Jayakar et al., 1992). The same frequency range is also
known to provoke afterdischarges and was actually used in the
kindling model of epilepsy (Goddard, 1967; Racine, 1972).
HIGH-FREQUENCY STIMULATION (HFS) CONDITION

Finally, for the high-frequency stimulation (HFS, f > 70 Hz) condition, the direct and sustained excitation of reticular nucleus
(RtN) interneurons leads to strong inhibition of TC cells and
thus to dramatic decrease of their firing rate. Despite the fact
that TC neurons are also affected by stimulation, the response
of reticular GABAergic neurons to stimulation and the higher
efficiency of GABA-mediated currents ensure that IPSPs override EPSPs on TC cells. In this case, the reduced excitatory
input to cortical pyramidal cells also leads to a suppression of
epileptic activity (Figure 9D). This result corroborates reported
stimulation studies where HFS (>100 Hz) was associated with
significant decrease in epileptiform discharges in vitro, and reduction in seizure frequency in responding patients (Velasco et al.,
2006; Fisher et al., 2010). This hypothesis is in line with recent
findings suggesting that HFS of the globus pallidus (GPi) in dystonia patients decreased its firing by stimulation-evoked GABA
release from afferent fibers and thereby the enhancement of
inhibitory synaptic transmission by HFS (Liu et al., 2012).
Similarly, HFS (100 Hz–130 Hz) of the STN neurons in vitro
showed a suppression of the activity of the majority of neurons by the reinforcement of inhibitory responses (Filali et al.,
2004). Other HFS studies also provided evidence on the inhibition of GPi output during HFS in human patients (Dostrovsky
et al., 2000) as well as the disruption thalamocortical network’s
dysrhythmia (McIntyre and Hahn, 2010; Kendall et al., 2011).

www.frontiersin.org

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 13

Mina et al.

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

CONCLUSION
In epilepsy research, it is well-admitted that there is, unfortunately, a lack of tangible results regarding the effects of
electrical stimulation in the brain. Therefore, the very crucial
issue of choosing the “optimal” stimulation parameters remains
unsolved, whatever the stimulation procedure. Although computational models are always based on a number of simplifying
assumptions, we think that they provide an efficient framework to
(i) account for the many and essential factors that may intervene
during stimulation procedures and (ii) analyze the links between
these factors in a formal manner. This approach is particularly
fruitful when models are well grounded in experimental/clinical
data (Wendling et al., 2012). This is somehow a weak point of this
study since we could make use of data sets recorded in one patient
only. However, it should be mentioned that these very informative data sets stay relatively rare since many conditions have to be
met (patient candidate to surgery, FCD, electrodes positioned in
appropriate structures).
At this stage, the face value of the model is satisfactory. The
next step is obviously to test the model predictions using animal

REFERENCES
Adhikari, M. H., Heeroma, J. H.,
Di Bernardo, M., Krauskopf, B.,
Richardson, M. P., Walker, M. C.,
et al. (2009). Characterisation of
cortical activity in response to deep
brain stimulation of ventral-lateral
nucleus: modelling and experiment.
J. Neurosci. Methods 183, 77–85. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2009.06.044
Avoli, M., Louvel, J., Mattia, D., Olivier,
A., Esposito, V., Pumain, R., et al.
(2003). Epileptiform synchronization in the human dysplastic cortex. Epileptic Disord. 5(Suppl. 2),
S45–S50.
Beurrier, C., Bioulac, B., Audin, J.,
and Hammond, C. (2001). Highfrequency stimulation produces a
transient blockade of voltage-gated
currents in subthalamic neurons.
J. Neurophysiol. 85, 1351–1356.
Bikson, M., Inoue, M., Akiyama, H.,
Deans, J. K., Fox, J. E., Miyakawa,
H., et al. (2004). Effects of uniform
extracellular DC electric fields on
excitability in rat hippocampal slices
in vitro. J. Physiol. 557, 175–190. doi:
10.1113/jphysiol.2003.055772
Bojak, I., and Liley, D. T. (2005).
Modeling the effects of anesthesia
on the electroencephalogram.
Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin. Soft
Matter Phys. 71:041902. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevE.71.041902
Boon, P., Raedt, R., De Herdt, V.,
Wyckhuys, T., and Vonck, K.
(2009).
Electrical
stimulation
for the treatment of epilepsy.
Neurotherapeutics 6, 218–227. doi:
10.1016/j.nurt.2008.12.003
Boudreau, C. E., and Ferster, D.
(2005). Short-term depression

in
thalamocortical
synapses
of cat primary visual cortex.
J. Neurosci. 25, 7179–7190. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1445-05.2005
Brázdil, M., Halámek, J., Jurák, P.,
Daniel, P., Kuba, R., Chrastina,
J., et al. (2010). Interictal highfrequency oscillations indicate
seizure onset zone in patients
with focal cortical dysplasia.
Epilepsy Res. 90, 28–32. doi:
10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2010.03.003
Breakspear, M., Roberts, J. A., Terry, J.
R., Rodrigues, S., Mahant, N., and
Robinson, P. A. (2006). A unifying
explanation of primary generalized
seizures through nonlinear brain
modeling and bifurcation analysis.
Cereb. Cortex 16, 1296–1313. doi:
10.1093/cercor/bhj072
Calcagnotto, M. E., Paredes, M. F.,
Tihan, T., Barbaro, N. M., and
Baraban, S. C. (2005). Dysfunction
of synaptic inhibition in epilepsy
associated with focal cortical dysplasia. J. Neurosci. 25, 9649–9657. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2687-05.2005
Chung, S., Li, X., and Nelson, S.
B. (2002). Short-term depression at thalamocortical synapses
contributes to rapid adaptation
of cortical sensory responses
in vivo. Neuron 34, 437–446. doi:
10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00659-1
Cooper, I. S., Amin, I., and Gilman, S.
(1973). The effect of chronic cerebellar stimulation upon epilepsy in
man. Trans. Am. Neurol. Assoc. 98,
192–196.
Crunelli, V., Cope, D. W., and Terry,
J. R. (2011). Transition to absence
seizures and the role of GABA(A)
receptors. Epilepsy Res. 97, 283–289.

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

models. Experiments can be undertaken in rodents with electrodes implanted in the cerebral cortex and in the thalamus.
First, we could start with control animals to assess the modulation of cortical rhythms during/after direct thalamic stimulation
at various frequencies and for controlled vigilance states (sleep,
awake, resting, exploratory). In these controls, some drugs can
be used to alter some parameters related to synaptic transmission
(in a more or less specific manner) which have a correspondence
in the model, on the other hand. Then, refined experimental
models could be introduced to get closer to the epilepsy context
including models of developmental dysplastic lesions [see review
in Schwartzkroin and Wenzel (2012)]. Hopefully, this combined
computational/experimental approach will help us to disclose
some of the highly intricate effects of DBS either at local or at
network level.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by Region Bretagne, France. The first
author benefits from a research allocation (ARED) in the context
of the project entitled “STIMULE.”
David, O., and Friston, K. J. (2003). A
neural mass model for MEG/EEG:
coupling and neuronal dynamics.
Neuroimage 20, 1743–1755. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.07.015
Davis, R., Engle, H., Kudzma, J.,
Gray, E., Ryan, T., and Dusnak, A.
(1982). Update of chronic cerebellar stimulation for spasticity and
epilepsy. Appl. Neurophysiol. 45,
44–50.
Degos, B., Deniau, J. M., Thierry,
A. M., Glowinski, J., Pezard,
L., and Maurice, N. (2005).
Neuroleptic-induced
catalepsy:
electrophysiological
mechanisms
of functional recovery induced
by high-frequency stimulation
of the subthalamic nucleus.
J. Neurosci. 25, 7687–7696. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1056-05.2005
Dorval, A. D., Russo, G. S., Hashimoto,
T., Xu, W., Grill, W. M., and
Vitek, J. L. (2008). Deep brain
stimulation
reduces
neuronal
entropy in the MPTP-primate
model of Parkinson’s disease.
J. Neurophysiol. 100, 2807–2818.
doi: 10.1152/jn.90763.2008
Dostrovsky, J. O., Levy, R., Wu, J.
P., Hutchison, W. D., Tasker, R.
R., and Lozano, A. M. (2000).
Microstimulation-induced inhibition of neuronal firing in human
globus pallidus. J. Neurophysiol. 84,
570–574.
Filali, M., Hutchison, W. D., Palter, V.
N., Lozano, A. M., and Dostrovsky,
J. O. (2004). Stimulation-induced
inhibition of neuronal firing in
human subthalamic nucleus. Exp.
Brain Res. 156, 274–281. doi:
10.1007/s00221-003-1784-y

www.frontiersin.org

Fisher, R., Salanova, V., Witt, T.,
Worth, R., Henry, T., Gross, R.,
et al. (2010). Electrical stimulation of the anterior nucleus of thalamus for treatment of refractory
epilepsy. Epilepsia 51, 899–908. doi:
10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02536.x
Freeman, W. J. (1973). “A model of
the olfactory system,” in, Neural
Modeling, eds M. A. B. Brazier,
D. O. Walter, and D. Schneider
(Los Angeles, CA: University. of
California), 41–62.
Freeman, W. J. (1992). Tutorial
on neurobiology: from single
neurons to brain chaos. Int. J.
Bifurcat. Chaos 2, 451–482. doi:
10.1142/S0218127492000653
Frohlich, F., and McCormick, D. A.
(2010). Endogenous electric fields
may guide neocortical network
activity. Neuron 67, 129–143. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2010.06.005
Gabernet, L., Jadhav, S. P., Feldman,
D. E., Carandini, M., and Scanziani,
M. (2005). Somatosensory integration controlled by dynamic thalamocortical feed-forward inhibition. Neuron 48, 315–327. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2005.09.022
Goddard, G. V. (1967). Development
of epileptic seizures through
brain stimulation at low intensity. Nature 214, 1020–1021. doi:
10.1038/2141020a0
Hablitz, J. J. (1976). Intramuscular
penicillin epilepsy in the cat: effects
of chronic cerebellar stimulation.
Exp. Neurol. 50, 505–514. doi:
10.1016/0014-4886(76)90022-4
Hammond, C., Bergman, H., and
Brown, P. (2007). Pathological synchronization in Parkinson’s disease:

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 14

Mina et al.

networks, models and treatments.
Trends Neurosci. 30, 357–364. doi:
10.1016/j.tins.2007.05.004
Isaacson, J. S., and Scanziani, M.
(2011). How inhibition shapes cortical activity. Neuron 72, 231–243.
doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2011.
09.027
Jansen, B. H., Zouridakis, G.,
and Brandt, M. E. (1993). A
neurophysiologically-based mathematical model of flash visual
evoked potentials. Biol. Cybern. 68,
275–283. doi: 10.1007/BF00224863
Jayakar, P., Alvarez, L. A., Duchowny,
M. S., and Resnick, T. J. (1992).
A safe and effective paradigm to
functionally map the cortex in
childhood. J. Clin. Neurophysiol.
9, 288–293. doi: 10.1097/00004691199204010-00009
Jiang, B., Akaneya, Y., Hata, Y., and
Tsumoto, T. (2003). Long-term
depression is not induced by lowfrequency stimulation in rat visual
cortex in vivo: a possible preventing
role of endogenous brain-derived
neurotrophic factor. J. Neurosci. 23,
3761–3770.
Kendall, H. L., Frederick, L. H., SuYoune, C., Dongchul, C. L., David,
W. R., Cameron, C. M., et al.
(2011). High frequency stimulation
abolishes thalamic network oscillations: an electrophysiological and
computational analysis. J. Neural
Eng. 8:046001. doi: 10.1088/17412560/8/4/046001
Kim, E., Owen, B., Holmes, W. R.,
and Grover, L. M. (2012). Decreased
afferent excitability contributes to
synaptic depression during high frequency stimulation in hippocampal area CA1. J. Neurophysiol. 108,
1965–1976. doi: 10.1152/jn.00276.
2011
Krstulovic,
S.,
and
Gribonval,
R. (2006). “Mptk: Matching
Pursuit Made Tractable,” in:
IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, (Toulouse), 496–499.
Liley, D. T., and Bojak, I. (2005).
Understanding the transition to
seizure by modeling the epileptiform activity of general anesthetic
agents. J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 22,
300–313.
Liu, L. D., Prescott, I. A., Dostrovsky,
J. O., Hodaie, M., Lozano, A. M.,
and Hutchison, W. D. (2012).
Frequency-dependent effects of
electrical stimulation in the globus
pallidus of dystonia patients.
J. Neurophysiol. 108, 5–17. doi:
10.1152/jn.00527.2011
Lopes Da Silva, F. H. (2006). Eventrelated neural activities: what
about phase? Prog. Brain Res. 159,

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

3–17. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(06)
59001-6
Lopes Da Silva, F. H., Hoeks, A., Smits,
H., and Zetterberg, L. H. (1974).
Model of brain rhythmic activity. The alpha-rhythm of the thalamus. Kybernetik 15, 27–37. doi:
10.1007/BF00270757
Lopes Da Silva, F. H., van Rotterdam,
A., Barts, P., van Heusden, E., and
Burr, W. (1976). Models of neuronal
populations: the basic mechanisms
of rhythmicity. Prog. Brain Res.
45, 281–308. doi: 10.1016/S00796123(08)60995-4
Lytton, W. W. (2008). Computer modelling of epilepsy. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
9, 626–637. doi: 10.1038/nrn2416
Mallat, S. G., and Zhifeng, Z. (1993).
Matching pursuits with timefrequency
dictionaries.
Signal
Processing, IEEE Transactions 41,
3397–3415. doi: 10.1109/78.258082
Manola, L., Holsheimer, J., Veltink,
P., and Buiteweg, J. R. (2007).
Anodal vs cathodal stimulation of
motor cortex: a modeling study.
Clin. Neurophysiol. 118, 464–474.
doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2006.09.012
Manola, L., Roelofsen, B. H.,
Holsheimer, J., Marani, E., and
Geelen, J. (2005). Modelling motor
cortex stimulation for chronic pain
control: electrical potential field,
activating functions and responses
of simple nerve fibre models. Med.
Biol. Eng. Comput. 43, 335–343. doi:
10.1007/BF02345810
Marten, F., Rodrigues, S., Benjamin,
O., Richardson, M. P., and Terry,
J. R. (2009). Onset of polyspike
complexes in a mean-field model
of human electroencephalography
and its application to absence
epilepsy. Philos. Trans. A Math.
Phys. Eng. Sci. 367, 1145–1161. doi:
10.1098/rsta.2008.0255
McIntyre, C. C., Grill, W. M., Sherman,
D. L., and Thakor, N. V. (2004a).
Cellular effects of deep brain
stimulation: model-based analysis of activation and inhibition.
J. Neurophysiol. 91, 1457–1469.
McIntyre, C. C., and Hahn, P. J. (2010).
Network perspectives on the mechanisms of deep brain stimulation.
Neurobiol. Dis. 38, 329–337. doi:
10.1016/j.nbd.2009.09.022
McIntyre, C. C., Savasta, M., KerkerianLe Goff, L., and Vitek, J. L. (2004b).
Uncovering the mechanism(s)
of action of deep brain stimulation: activation, inhibition, or
both. J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 115,
1239–1248.
Miranda, P. C., Wendling, F., Ruffini,
G., Merlet, I., Molaee-Ardekani,
B., Dunne, S., et al. (2009). Brain
Stimulation: Models, Experiments

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

and Open Questions, Deliverable
D1.1: Review of the State of the
Art in Currents Distribution and
Effects HIVE (FET Open FP7
EU project), Available online at:
http://hive-eu.org
Molaee-Ardekani, B., Benquet, P.,
Bartolomei, F., and Wendling,
F.
(2010).
Computational
modeling
of
high-frequency
oscillations at the onset of neocortical partial seizures: from
‘altered structure’ to ‘dysfunction’.
Neuroimage 52, 1109–1122. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.049
Molaee-Ardekani, B., Marquez-Ruiz,
J., Merlet, I., Leal-Campanario, R.,
Gruart, A., Sanchez-Campusano,
R., et al. (2013). Effects of transcranial Direct Current Stimulation
(tDCS) on cortical activity: a computational modeling study. Brain
Stimul. 6, 25–39. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.
2011.12.006
Nunez, P. L. (1974). The brain wave
equation: a model for the EEG.
Math. Biosci. 21, 279–297. doi:
10.1016/0025-5564(74)90020-0
Palmini, A. (2010). Electrophysiology
of the focal cortical dysplasias.
Epilepsia 51(Suppl. 1), 23–26. doi:
10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02437.x
Pasnicu, A., Denoyer, Y., Haegelen,
C., Pasqualini, E., and Biraben, A.
(2013). Modulation of paroxysmal
activity in focal cortical dysplasia
by centromedian thalamic nucleus
stimulation. Epilepsy Res. 104,
264–268. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.
2012.10.012
Pouille, F., and Scanziani, M.
(2001). Enforcement of temporal fidelity in pyramidal cells by
somatic feed-forward inhibition.
Science 293, 1159–1163. doi:
10.1126/science.1060342
Racine, R. J. (1972). Modification
of seizure activity by electrical stimulation. II. Motor
seizure. Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 32, 281–294. doi:
10.1016/0013-4694(72)90177-0
Rattay, F. (1998). Analysis of the electrical excitation of CNS neurons. IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 45, 766–772.
doi: 10.1109/10.678611
Reimer, G. R., Grimm, R. J., and
Dow, R. S. (1967). Effects
of cerebellar stimulation on
cobalt-induced epilepsy in the
cat.
Electroencephalogr.
Clin.
Neurophysiol. 23, 456–462. doi:
10.1016/0013-4694(67)90188-5
Roberts, J. A., and Robinson, P.
A. (2008). Modeling absence
seizure dynamics: implications
for basic mechanisms and measurement
of
thalamocortical
and corticothalamic
latencies.

www.frontiersin.org

J. Theor. Biol. 253, 189–201. doi:
10.1016/j.jtbi.2008.03.005
Robinson, P. A., Rennie, C. J., and
Rowe, D. L. (2002). Dynamics
of large-scale brain activity in
normal arousal states and epileptic
seizures. Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin.
Soft Matter Phys. 65:041924. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevE.65.041924
Robinson, P. A., Rennie, C. J., and
Wright, J. J. (1997). Propagation
and stability of waves of electrical activity in the cerebral cortex. Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin.
Soft Matter Phys. 56, 826–840. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevE.56.826
Rowe, D. L., Robinson, P. A., and
Rennie, C. J. (2004). Estimation
of neurophysiological parameters
from the waking EEG using a biophysical model of brain dynamics.
J. Theor. Biol. 231, 413–433. doi:
10.1016/j.jtbi.2004.07.004
Schwartzkroin, P. A., and Wenzel,
H. J. (2012). Are developmental dysplastic lesions epileptogenic?
Epilepsia 53(Suppl. 1), 35–44. doi:
10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03473.x
Shen, K. Z., Zhu, Z. T., Munhall, A.,
and Johnson, S. W. (2003). Synaptic
plasticity in rat subthalamic nucleus
induced by high-frequency stimulation. Synapse 50, 314–319. doi:
10.1002/syn.10274
Shukla, A. W., Moro, E., Gunraj, C.,
Lozano, A., Hodaie, M., Lang, A.,
et al. (2013). Long-term subthalamic nucleus stimulation improves
sensorimotor integration and proprioception. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry. doi:10.1136/jnnp-2012304102. [Epub ahead of print].
Sillay, K., and Starr, P. (2009).
“Chapter 42 - deep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s Disease,” in
Neuromodulation, eds E. S. Krames,
P. H. Peckham, and A. R. Rezai
(San Diego, CA: Academic Press),
539–548.
Sisodiya, S. M., Fauser, S., Cross, J.
H., and Thom, M. (2009). Focal
cortical dysplasia type II: biological features and clinical perspectives. Lancet Neurol. 8, 830–843. doi:
10.1016/S1474-4422(09)70201-7
Speechley, W. J., Hogsden, J. L.,
and Dringenberg, H. C. (2007).
Continuous white noise exposure
during and after auditory critical
period differentially alters bidirectional thalamocortical plasticity
in rat auditory cortex in vivo. Eur.
J. Neurosci. 26, 2576–2584. doi:
10.1111/j.1460-9568.2007.05857.x
Stam, C. J., Pijn, J. P., Suffczynski, P.,
and Lopes Da Silva, F. H. (1999).
Dynamics of the human alpha
rhythm: evidence for non-linearity?
Clin. Neurophysiol. 110, 1801–1813.

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 15

Mina et al.

Suffczynski, P., Kalitzin, S., Da Silva, F.
L., Parra, J., Velis, D., and Wendling,
F. (2008). Active paradigms of
seizure anticipation: computer
model evidence for necessity of
stimulation. Phys. Rev. E Stat.
Nonlin. Soft Matter Phys. 78:051917.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.78.051917
Suffczynski, P., Kalitzin, S., and
Lopes Da Silva, F. H. (2004).
Dynamics
of
non-convulsive
epileptic phenomena modeled
by a bistable neuronal network.
Neuroscience 126, 467–484. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.03.014
Suffczynski,
P.,
Kalitzin,
S.,
Pfurtscheller, G., and Lopes Da
Silva, F. H. (2001). Computational
model
of
thalamo-cortical
networks:
dynamical
control
of alpha rhythms in relation to focal attention. Int. J.
Psychophysiol. 43, 25–40. doi:
10.1016/S0167-8760(01)00177-5
Talairach, J., Bancaud, J., Szikla, G.,
Bonis, A., Geier, S., and Vedrenne,
C. (1974). [New approach to
the neurosurgery of epilepsy.
Stereotaxic methodology and therapeutic results. 1. Introduction
and
history].
Neurochirurgie
20(Suppl. 1), 1–240.
Velasco, A. L., Velasco, F., Jiménez,
F., Velasco, M., Castro, G.,
Carrillo-Ruiz, J. D., et al. (2006).
Neuromodulation of the centromedian thalamic nuclei in
the treatment of generalized
seizures and the improvement
of the quality of life in patients
with Lennox–Gastaut syndrome.
Epilepsia 47, 1203–1212. doi:
10.1111/j.1528-1167.2006.00593.x

Frequency-dependent effects of DBS

Velasco, F., Velasco, A. L., Velasco,
M., Jimenez, F., Carrillo-Ruiz, J. D.,
and Castro, G. (2007). Deep brain
stimulation for treatment of the
epilepsies: the centromedian thalamic target. Acta Neurochir. Suppl.
97, 337–342. doi: 10.1007/978-3211-33081-4_38
Velasco, F., Velasco, M., Velasco, A. L.,
Jimenez, F., Marquez, I., and Rise,
M. (1995). Electrical stimulation
of the centromedian thalamic
nucleus in control of seizures:
long-term
studies.
Epilepsia
36, 63–71. doi: 10.1111/j.15281157.1995.tb01667.x
Velasco, M., Velasco, F., and Velasco, A.
L. (2001). Centromedian-thalamic
and
hippocampal
electrical
stimulation for the control of
intractable
epileptic
seizures.
J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 18, 495–513.
doi: 10.1097/00004691-20011100000001
Velasco, M., Velasco, F., Velasco, A. L.,
Brito, F., Jimenez, F., Marquez, I.,
et al. (1997). Electrocortical and
behavioral responses produced by
acute electrical stimulation of the
human centromedian thalamic
nucleus. Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophysiol. 102, 461–471. doi:
10.1016/S0013-4694(96)95203-0
Velasco, M., Velasco, F., Velasco, A. L.,
Jimenez, F., Brito, F., and Marquez,
I. (2000). Acute and chronic electrical stimulation of the centromedian thalamic nucleus: modulation of reticulo-cortical systems
and predictor factors for generalized seizure control. Arch. Med. Res.
31, 304–315. doi: 10.1016/S01884409(00)00085-0

Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience

Wendling, F. (2008). Computational
models of epileptic activity: a
bridge between observation and
pathophysiological
interpretation. Expert Rev. Neurother. 8,
889–896. doi: 10.1586/14737175.8.
6.889
Wendling,
F.,
Bartolomei,
F.,
Bellanger, J. J., and Chauvel, P.
(2002). Epileptic fast activity
can be explained by a model of
impaired GABAergic dendritic
inhibition. Eur. J. Neurosci. 15,
1499–1508. doi: 10.1046/j.14609568.2002.01985.x
Wendling, F., Bartolomei, F., Mina,
F., Huneau, C., and Benquet,
P. (2012). Interictal spikes, fast
ripples and seizures in partial
epilepsies - combining multi-level
computational models with experimental data. Eur. J. Neurosci. 36,
2164–2177. doi: 10.1111/j.14609568.2012.08039.x
Wendling, F., Bellanger, J. J.,
Bartolomei, F., and Chauvel, P.
(2000). Relevance of nonlinear
lumped-parameter models in the
analysis of depth-EEG epileptic
signals. Biol. Cybern. 83, 367–378.
doi: 10.1007/s004220000160
Wilson, H. R., and Cowan, J. D. (1972).
Excitatory and inhibitory interactions in localized populations of
model neurons. Biophys. J. 12,
1–24. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3495(72)
86068-5
Wright, G. D., and Weller, R. O. (1983).
Biopsy and post-mortem findings
in a patient receiving cerebellar
stimulation for epilepsy. J. Neurol.
Neurosurg. Psychiatr. 46, 266–273.
doi: 10.1136/jnnp.46.3.266

www.frontiersin.org

Wright, J. J., Kydd, R. R., and Lees,
G. J. (1985). State-changes in the
brain viewed as linear steady-states
and non-linear transitions between
steady-states. Biol. Cybern. 53,
11–17. doi: 10.1007/BF00355686
Zavaglia, M., Astolfi, L., Babiloni, F.,
and Ursino, M. (2006). A neural
mass model for the simulation of
cortical activity estimated from high
resolution EEG during cognitive or
motor tasks. J. Neurosci. Methods
157, 317–329. doi: 10.1016/j.
jneumeth.2006.04.022
Conflict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research
was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.
Received: 07 December 2012; paper
pending published: 23 March 2013;
accepted: 23 June 2013; published online:
16 July 2013.
Citation: Mina F, Benquet P, Pasnicu
A, Biraben A and Wendling F (2013)
Modulation of epileptic activity by deep
brain stimulation: a model-based study
of frequency-dependent effects. Front.
Comput. Neurosci. 7:94. doi: 10.3389/
fncom.2013.00094
Copyright © 2013 Mina, Benquet,
Pasnicu, Biraben and Wendling. This is
an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits use,
distribution and reproduction in other
forums, provided the original authors
and source are credited and subject to any
copyright notices concerning any thirdparty graphics etc.

July 2013 | Volume 7 | Article 94 | 16

