370

J. Phy8iol. (1964), 174, pp. 370-399
With 18 text-figurem
Printed in Great Britain

THE VENTRO-BASAL COMPLEX OF THE THALAMUS: TYPES
OF CELLS, THEIR RESPONSES AND THEIR
FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION

BY P. ANDERSEN,* J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARSt
From the Department of Physiology, Australian National University,
Canberra, Australia

(Received 11 April 1964)

Volleys in cutaneous nerves and afferent impulses initiated by tactile
and joint-stimulation produce potential changes and also evoke the discharge of impulses in a quite sharply demarcated region of the contralateral thalamus, which is virtually coextensive with the ventro-basal
complex (VBC) (Mountcastle & Henneman, 1949, 1952; Rose & Mountcastle, 1952; Poggio & Mountcastle, 1963). There have been extensive
investigations of the activation of these VBC cells, as they will henceforth
be called, by various forms of peripheral stimulation, and in particular
Rose & Mountcastle (1954) studied with great detail and precision the
repetitive spike discharges that are evoked by single volleys in cutaneous
nerves: for example, the effect of variations in volley size on the number
and frequency of the constituent impulses of the response, and also an
analysis of the inter-spike intervals. Poggio & Mountcastle (1963) paid
particular attention to the location, modality responsiveness and topographic organization of the individual VBC cells. On the basis of the
dynamic properties, particularly the relation between stimulus frequency
and response frequency, they reached the conclusion that virtually all
VBC cells belong to a single uniform class, which is characterized by the
fidelity of response to rapid repetitive stimulation of afferent nerves,
there being on the average frequency following up to 100-120 sec.
Purpura & Cohen (1962) and Purpura & Shofer (1963) very successfully
employed intracellular recording in order to analyse the responses evoked
by stimulation of the mid-line thalamic nuclear complex. They demonstrated for the first time the large and prolonged post-synaptic inhibitory
potentials of cells of the nucleus ventralis anterior, and the influence of
these powerful inhibitions on spontaneous and evoked discharges. They
* Rockefeller Fellow. Present address: Anatomical Institute, Karl Johans Gate 47, Oslo,
Norway.
t Wellcome Fellow. Present address: National Hospital for Nervous Diseases, Queen's
Square, London, W.C. 1. England.

THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
371
postulated that this inhibition was the major factor in producing the
temporal pattern of bursts of repetitive responses that was evoked by
stimulation of the centre median.
The present paper gives an account of investigations on the VBC cells.
Their responses were evoked by the different stimuli that were provided
either by cutaneous afferent volleys or by stimulation of the somatosensory cortex. Both extracellular and intracellular recordings were
employed in the attempt to analyse the complex responses of the VBC
cells, particularly their rhythmic burst discharges. The ultimate objective
was to define the inhibitory pathways, to identify their constituent
interneurones and to distinguish them from the thalamo-cortical relay
cells. There have been preliminary publications of some parts of these
investigations (Andersen & Eccles, 1962; Andersen, Brooks & Eccles,
1964). The experimental procedures have been fully reported in the
preceding paper (Andersen, Brooks, Eccles & Sears, 1964).
RESULTS

Thalamo-cortical relay cells
Spike response.s. In our identification of a thalamo-cortical relay (TCR)
cell the only valid criteria were, conjointly, that the thalamic cell must be
fired by a volley from an afferent nerve and that it must be invaded antidromically when the somato-sensory cortex is stimulated. In our standard
procedure of testing for antidromic invasion, the bipolar stimulating
electrode with about 2 mm interpolar distance was applied to the SI
somato-sensory arm area. Of course, this definitive identification applies
only in the positive sense; TCR cells may fail to qualify because the
appropriate afferent nerve was not available for stimulation, or because
the cortical stimulus failed to excite their axonal terminals.
Figure 1 A, B gives an example of identification responses: the orthodromic spike potential set up at 3x5 msec after the arrival of the dorsal
column volley at the cuneate nucleus in A, and the antidromic spike
potential at 05 msec after the cortical stimulus in B. The antidromic
spike appears to have a double composition comparable with the IS-SD
spike of motoneurones, which may be observed extracellularly (Fatt, 1957)
as well as intracellularly (Brock, Coombs & Eccles, 1953). For example,
in the threshold-straddling series of cortical stimulation (Fig. 1 D), the
double spike with an interval of 02 msec appeared in an all-or-none manner
superimposed on the stimulus artifact in three out of the eight superimposed traces, while with a stronger cortical stimulus there was invariably
a double spike (C). Double cortical stimulation in C-H shows all stages
in the recovery from refractoriness of the two components: at 1-24 msec
24

Physiol. 174

372
P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
(E) there was refractoriness of both, possibly owing to the failure to set
up an antidromic impulse; the interval of 1*36 msec (F) was just critical
for production of the first component; at a testing interval of 1F75 msec
(G, H) the first component was always evoked, but the second behaved
in an all-or-none manner, arising at about 0-4 msec after the first in H.
A

M

CORT E

C

2 mV

CORTF

msec

1-75 msec

12mscG

msec
136 msec Hemm

Fig. 1. Responses of a thalamo-cortical relay cell. The spike potentials were
recorded extracellularly by a micro-electrode in the ventro-basal complex. A and
B show spikes recorded at same amplification and sweep speed, and evoked
orthodromically (A) by a contralateral median nerve volley and antidromically
(B) by a stimulus to the ipsilateral somato-sensory cortex. In A the upper trace is
from the surface of the contralateral cuneate nucleus. C and D are antidromic
responses at faster sweep speed, the cortical stimulus in D being just on threshold.
E-H give responses to two cortical stimuli applied through the same electrodes
at the indicated intervals. Same amplification for all thalamic records. All
records formed by the superposition of several traces.
A

CORT

S

BCORTCD
+

7f
msec

E

t~~~O02 mV-4'N
lO

coRu

msec

co_m
+
0G5 msec

Fig. 2. Responses of a thalamo-cortical relay cell. A, B show at two sweep speeds
antidromic spike potentials extracellularly recorded in the ventro-basal complex
and evoked from the ipsilateral somato-sensory cortex. C, D, E are orthodromic
responses to contralateral U, SR and M volleys. In A, C-E the lower traces are
from the surface of the contralateral cuneate nucleus, and all are at the same speed
(below D) and amplification (above F). F-I are thalamic potentials evoked from
the sources specified and similarly recorded at same amplification, but at much
slower sweep speed.

THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
373
This IS-SD configuration of the antidromic spike potential was not
observed with all TCR cells (cf. Figs. 2 B, 3). Possibly the interval between
the two components may be too brief for detection by our relatively
crude recording procedures; alternatively, if the extracellular recording is
from dendrites, the very small initial IS component may escape recognition. A trace of this double IS-SD configuration can also be seen in the
orthodromically evoked spikes in Fig. 1 A, and has previously been
reported by Rose & Mountcastle (1954), and by Purpura & Cohen (1962).
The antidromic responses of the TCR cell in Fig. 2A, B show a single
spike response with a latency of 0 55 msec and a total duration of 0 6 msec.
Each of the three afferent volleys evoked a repetitive discharge of this
cell (C-E), the respective latencies of the first discharges being 4-85, 7-35
and 3-6 msec after arrival of the dorsal column volley in the cuneate
nucleus. Probably the SR response (D) had a long latency because it was
not produced directly by the SR volley, but only secondarily thereto by
the dorsal root reflexes or dorsal column reflexes that the SR volley
generated in M or U afferent fibres (Andersen, Eccles, Schmidt & Yokota,
1964). A similar explanation may also account for the last two spike
responses in C and E. The small spike response of a second cell provided
a further complication in E, where the fourth, very large, spike can be
seen to be due to superposition of the two spikes. The slower records of
F-I illustrate the way in which spike potentials tend to occur on the
negative components of the rhythmic waves, so contributing to the burst
discharges. Nevertheless, there was a considerable degree of variation
between successive responses to the same initial stimulus, either to the
cortical stimulus in F and G or to an ulnar afferent volley in H and I;
and the increasing asynchronism of spikes with negative waves doubtless
contributes to the progressive deterioration of the rhythmic wave (cf.
Andersen, Brooks, Eccles & Sears, 1964).
In applying the criterion of antidromic invasion from the cortical
stimulation, it must be recognized that often the antidromic impulse in a
thalamo-cortical fibre fails to invade the thalamic cell unless this is appropriately conditioned by depolarization. In the superposed traces of Fig. 3 I
only one of about fifteen cortical stimuli resulted in an antidromic spike
potential. However, if the cortical stimuli were applied during synaptic
excitation of this cell by an SR afferent volley, an antidromic spike
potential could invariably be produced. The optimal conditions for antidromic invasion occurred in Fig. 3D, E where the antidromic impulse
reached the cell before the synaptic excitation had caused it to fire
impulses. The latency of the antidromic spike was then 06 msec. In Fig.
3 A-C there is seen to be progressive improvement of antidromic invasion
as the antidromic impulse reached the thalamic cell later and later during
24-2

P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
the build up of synaptic excitation by the SR volley. In Fig. 3 F, G antidromic invasion was depressed on account of refractoriness owing to
synaptically generated spikes, but in H there was again a regular anti-

374

G~~~~~~~

A

e~~~~

>f
~
~
~ 1

~

lV~~~
_

~ ~ ~ ~msec

msec

Fig. 3. Facilitation of antidromic invasion of thalamo-cortical relay cell. As
described in text, antidromic invasion rarely occurs (I) unless conditioned by a
depolarization that in A-H is produced by a contralateral SR volley. In A-H the
SR volley is set up at a fixed time relative to the sweeps and the cortical stimulus
is applied progressively later in the sweep as shown. All records are formed by the
superposition of about ten faint traces.
53 msec

C~

-

32msec

~

35 msec

3

~~~1m

Q5.msy/4c
I2

Fig. 4. Antidromic and orthodromic activation of thalamo-cortical relay by subcortical stimulation. In A and B single stimuli were applied to the white matter
exposed after removal of the ipsilateral somato-sensory cortex by suction. In C-F
there was double stimulation through the same electrodes. After the extracellular
records of A, the micro-electrode partly impaled the cell as shown by the reversed
potentials in B-F (note the respective voltage scales). Further description in text.
All records are formed by the superposition of about five faint traces.

dromic invasion of the cell, which was presumably due to residual synaptic
excitation. The irregularity of size and configuration of the synaptically
evoked spikes in Fig. 3G, H indicates that impulse propagation over the

THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
375
cell was not an all-or-nothing phenomenon; and this is also seen where
antidromic invasion was not fully facilitated as in B, C, F and C. In part
this variability in spike response appears to be due to the double IS-SD
composition of the spike. The latency of the synaptically induced spike
response was as brief as 4-2 msec after the arrival of the SR volley at the
cuneate nucleus; and U and M volleys also initiated spikes at about this
same latency, 4-0 and 3-8 msec, respectively, there being a double spike
response (1-2 msec interval) to the M volley.
A cortical stimulus often evoked in the thalamus traces of spike
potentials that appeared to follow repetitively the initial antidromic
spike potential (see Fig. 2A). In Fig. 4A the single and the two superimposed traces all show the same triple spike response of unitary character,
the inter-spike intervals being 1-4 and 1-7 msec, respectively. Later this
same thalamic cell gave only the double spike response of Fig. 4B, where
the initial antidromic spike (latency 07 msec) sometimes failed (as in
Fig. 31).
Fig. 4C-F gives examples of responses to two cortical stimuli at the
indicated intervals. Rigorous interpretation of these responses is not
possible because of the variability of the antidromic invasion. However,
this invasion invariably occurred to the second cortical stimulus at 3-2,
3-35 and 5-3 msec, the failure at 2-15 msec being attributable to refractoriness following the second spike response evoked by the first stimulus.
Another point of interest is that the second conditioned response in C, D,
E can be seen to arise from a preliminary small depolarization or prepotential. Since the cortical stimuli in Fig. 4 were applied to the underlying white matter after removal of an extensive area of grey matter by
suction, and so were strictly subcortical, it must be concluded that the
second responses in Fig. 4 were generated in the thalamus. This could
conceivably be due to the synaptic excitatory action of a cortico-thalamic
pathway. A simpler alternative is that the excitation of thalamic cells
occurs through axon collaterals from the thalamo-cortical fibres, which
would be an example of positive feed-back. Since the second response of
the thalamic cell in Fig. 4 was produced even by a subcortical stimulus
below threshold for antidromic activation of that cell, it would have to be
postulated that the excitation was produced by recurrent collaterals of
other thalamo-cortical relay cells. Figure 7 shows other examples of the
effectiveness of cortical stimulation in generating spike potentials after
the initial antidromic spike.
Inhibitory and facilitatory action on impulse discharges. Following the
response evoked in the somato-sensory cortex by an afferent volley there
is a prolonged depression of the response produced by a second volley
either in the same or another nerve (Marshall, 1941; Andersen, Brooks,

P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
376
Eccles & Sears, 1964). For example, in the lower traces of the specimen
records of Fig. 5 there was virtually no cortical response to an SR volley
at 15 msec after the combined conditioning U + M volleys, and at 33 and
60 msec the response was small. As would be expected, this depressed
transmission to the cortex was paralleled by the reduced discharges of
individual thalamo-cortical relay cells; in Fig. 5 (upper traces) it can be
seen that the cell that gave two discharges in the control response gave
SR I

me

3-

0-

5-

33 msec
U+

M-SRmsec

60 msec
/~l

~

9612se
~ ~ 2m
40~~~~~~

5

-n

U

V

0
150
200 msec250
50
100
Fig. 5. Inhibition and facilitation of a thalamo-cortical relay cell. A. The control
specimen record evoked by a contralateral SR volley shows a double spike discharge of a TO:R cell (TH) and a slightly later positive wave (SP) with 'killed-end'
recording (SUBCORT) from the white matter exposed by removal of the somatosensory cortex. In the other specimen records the SR response was conditioned by
a preceding U plus M volley at the indicated intervals. Note separate potential
scales for the thalamic and subcortical records. B. In the plotted curves measurements from the whole series of responses (partly illustrated) are plotted against
the conditioning-testing intervals. Note separate ordinate scales for spike number,
spike latency and the size of the subcortical positive spike (SP). The mean control
values for each of these three measurements are given by the horizontal line.
0, spike number;@*, SP-wave, SUBCORT; *, spike latency.

none at 15 msec, and one at 33 msec. HIowever, at intervals around 100
msec, the testing volley was superimposed on the increased excitability
that was responsible for the first burst discharge; consequently the number
of spike discharges was increased to three at 96 msec and even more at
114 msec, as may be seen in the plotted points of Fig. 5. Thereafter the
depression was re-imposed during the P-wave that followed the first burst
discharge, but increased excitability again occurred during the second
burst discharge at about 200 msec. In Fig. 5 the latency of the first dis-

THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
377
charge of the unit spikes also gave an index of the initial inhibition and
of the intercurrent excitations and inhibitions due to burst discharges.
Curves for single unit responses of rat thalamus resembling in general those
of Fig. 5 have been illustrated by Angel & Dawson (1963).
The inhibitory action of an afferent nerve is also displayed by the
suppression of the spontaneous discharges of thalamic relay cells. The
two thalamic relay cells in Fig. 6 were fired by SR and M (A, B) volleys
and not by U (C). However, in D-F it is seen that all three nerve volleys
B

A

SR

_

C

msec

~~+; M

~~~~5 m

SR

100 msec

Fig. 6. Inhibition of spontaneous discharge of thalamo-cortical relay cells by a
contralateral afferent volley. Specimen records to SR, M and U volleys show that
only the first two evoked discharges from the two TCR cells; yet in D-F each of
the three volleys caused a prolonged cessation of the spontaneous firing of these
cells. Note much slower sweep speed for D-F, but same voltage scales. Two traces
are superposed in A-C; D-E are single traces.

caused a prolonged suppression (120-180 msec) of the spontaneous discharge of at least three cells including the two in A and B.
Figure 2 F-I shows that often a cell fires repetitively in a brief burst
during each of the waves of relative negativity that alternate with the
rhythmic P-waves (cf. Andersen, Brooks, Eccles & Sears, 1964). Two
possible explanations of these repetitive bursts can be suggested: one is
simply that the cell discharge is due to a prolonged excitatory synaptic
action which generates several spikes in quick succession; the other is
that the first discharge initiates some self re-exciting mechanism. This latter
explanation satisfactorily accounts for the burst discharges prematurely
initiated by cortical stimulation in Fig. 7 G-J.
In Fig. 7 the first burst discharge to a conditioning SR volley is shown
at a slow sweep speed (C, E), and also at a fast sweep speed (A), where
it is seen to comprise four unitary spikes at about 500/sec. The first burst

378
P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
was remarkably constant during the series of responses from which those
of Fig. 7 were selected. In the six control responses, of which two (C and
E) are illustrated, the average latency of the burst was 137 msec (range
AJ\wRJ9~N B
msec

TTJTT-TF

cv
msecmsec
\~~i

FEm

E

K

~61-

L

1~70~

wwoo

47N..
msec

10 msec
Fig. 7. Relation of cortical stimulation to the processes producing burst discharges
from thalamo-cortical relay cells. In the series of records C-N, the left-hand
traces show the relation of a testing subcortical stimulus (the somato-sensory
cortex having been removed) to the thalamic response evoked by a contralateral
SR volley, while the right-hand traces are fast sweeps in order to give details of the
responses evoked by the subcortical stimulus. The millisecond intervals between
the two columns give for each pair of responses the interval by which the SR
stimulus precedes the subcortical stimulus, e.g. SR 161 msec SUBCORT for C and
D. A and B show respectively the first burst discharge and the control antidromic response at this same fast sweep. As described in the text, the first burst
discharge normally occurred at a fairly constant time, the earliest observed time
for six control observations being marked by arrows in G, I and K. For this
purpose observations such as C and E serve as controls, the first burst discharge
preceding the subcortical stimulus.

129-145) and it comprised on the average four spikes (range 3-5). Figure
7 B shows that cortical stimulation evoked a double spike response resembling that in Fig. 1. When this cortical stimulus was applied at the indi-

cated intervals following the conditioning SR volley, the slow (C, E, G, I,
K and M) and fast (D, F, H, J, L and N) sweep records of Fig. 7 were

379
THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
obtained. It is of great significance that in G and I the cortical stimulus
caused the repetitive burst to appear prematurely at latencies of 114 and
92 msec, respectively, i.e. the testing interval plus the one millisecond
latency from stimulus to response. The corresponding fast records, H and
J, show that the burst prematurely initiated by the cortical stimulus
closely resembled the normal burst in A, except that in J the first interspike interval was longer. In Fig. 7D, H, J and L, the first component of
the double spike response due to cortical stimulation was absent. The
cortical stimulus at 70 msec (K, L) initiated only a single spike with a
somewhat lengthened latency, and at the trough of the P-wave, 47 msec,
(M, N) even that spike was suppressed. In E refractoriness due to the
immediately preceding burst discharge accounts for the failure of an
antidromic spike response, and during the second P-wave (C, D) the
response resembled that at 70 msec (K, L).
This ability of the cortical stimulus to initiate a premature repetitive
burst has also been observed with three other thalamic relay cells where
the repetitive burst response was sufficiently stable. The interpretation
of these results will be attempted in the Discussion.
Intracellular recording of synaptically induced potentials. The thalamic
cells are relatively small and very readily injured by the impaling microelectrode. Prolonged conditions of stable recording were therefore rarely
obtained, and the membrane potentials were so low that spike potentials
were often depressed or absent. Nevertheless, intracellular recording has
given much valuable information, particularly in relation to the mechanism
governing the production of the burst discharges.
Though there are no controls of extracellular field potentials, the
potential waves of Figs. 8 and 9 can be identified as hyperpolarizing when
in the downward direction (increased intracellular negativity) and depolarizing when upward. The direction of recording is inverted with respect
to the extracellular recording of thalamic potential waves in the preceding
paper (Andersen, Brooks, Eccles & Sears, 1964); hence the extracellular
field potentials would be opposite in sign to the intracellular, but much
smaller in amplitude. Consequently, the changes in membrane potential
would actually be a little larger than those observed in the records of
Figs. 8 and 9. The lowest trace of Fig. 8 B shows the transition almost to
extracellular recording and illustrates that the large dominant deflexions
in the two upper TH traces were genuine membrane hyperpolarizations.
In Fig. 9 the impaled cell is identified as a thalamo-cortical relay cell
because it is synaptically excited to discharge an impulse by single M and
U volleys (A-C), and is also antidromically activated after cortical
stimulation (E-G). When first impaled (A-C), the large initial hyperpolarization following the spike was interrupted by a small wave of

P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
380
relative depolarization with a summit at about 150 msec (see arrows)
and then there was a larger later wave in A-C on which was superimposed
a burst discharge in B and C at about 250 msec after the M and U volleys.
With cortical stimulation in D the two depolarizing waves were of similar
height, but somewhat later (F, C) the first wave was large with three
unitary spikes superimposed (the fast record of M) and the second wave
was small (H-I). These unitary spikes of the first burst response are seen
in M to be identical with the antidromic spike produced by a cortical
A

CORT

20 mV

'

+

TH'

U

U

L

THC

SR

10 msec

10 msec

Fig. 8. Intracellular responses of thalamo-cortical relay cells. In A the membrane
potential was about -60 mV and contralateral U and SR volleys set up large
spike potentials and later IPSPs, whereas cortical stimulation evoked only a small
initial depolarization and later IPSP. Two examples of burst discharges are seen.
In B are two examples of effect of contralateral U volleys in evoking an initial
EPSP and later rhythmic IPSPs with signs of burst discharges on the depolarizations between the successive IPSPs. The simultaneously recorded traces of GUN
responses are seen below the TH traces. Lowest trace shows TH record when
micro-electrode had virtually moved to an extracellular position.

stimulus at the arrow about 15 msec later. In J-L and N-P this cortical
stimulus was applied at progressively shorter intervals after the initial
stimulus (arrows), I being the control response to one cortical stimulus
alone. During the second wave of hyperpolarization (J, K), antidromic
invasion failed and there was merely a small additional hyperpolarization.
At L there was a small antidromic spike, indicating failure of invasion
of most of the cell. In N the antidromic response was superimposed on the
first burst response. At the still briefer intervals, 0 and P, antidromic
invasion again failed during the first initial hyperpolarization, but just
as in J and K an additional hyperpolarization was produced.

381
THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
When the cortical stimulus failed to produce an antidromic spike
potential, as occurred for the second stimulus in J, K, 0 and P (Fig. 9),
the hyperpolarization must be synaptically induced, and be an example
of an inhibitory post-synaptic potential (IPSP). It might be suspected
that the initial spike response in Fig. 9, whether orthodromic (A-C) or
antidromic (E-L, N-P), would be followed by an after-hyperpolarization,
AHP, that would summate with the concurrent IPSP, much as occurs
with the after-hyperpolarization and the recurrent IPSP of the motoneurones (Eccles, Fatt & Koketsu, 1954). However, it is seen in G that,
100 msec
c-

B

A

lO0mV]F

E

100 msec

t

GH

t

t

10 msec

Fig. 9. Intracellular recording from a thalamo-cortical relay cell. The condition
of recording improved after the initial series, A-D. Responses A-C were evoked
by the contralateral M + U afferent volleys. Responses D-P were evoked by
stimulation of the ipsilateral somato-sensory cortex. There was double stimulation
in J-L and N-P, which were at the same sweep speed as I. A-D were at same
sweep speed and amplification. E-G were at the sweQp speed and amplification
indicated for E. Independent sweep speeds are given for H and M, but H-P at
same amplification. Further description in text.

when full antidromic invasion failed, the initial wave of hyperpolarization
was still as large as in E and F, and this is also seen when D is compared
to A, B and C. Other examples are given in Figs. 10 and 11, where orthodromic or antidromic volleys produced large initial hyperpolarizations in
the absence of impulse generation. In fact there is no evidence that the
spike potential of a thalamic relay cell is followed by any appreciable
after-hyperpolarization, which is in agreement with Purpura & Cohen
(1962).
Figure 9 gives excellent illustration of the way in which the burst dis-

382
P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
charges are generated by slow waves of depolarization. In the slow record
of H there were four successive waves of depolarization, three of which
generated burst discharges. The mechanism of production of these rhythmically occurring depolarizations is considered in the Discussion. Figure
9J-L and N-P shows the way in which an intercurrent cortical stimulus
interfered with the rhythmic depolarizations, which will also be considered
in the Discussion.
Figure 9A-C shows that an orthodromic volley sets up an initial EPSP
with superimposed spikes and a later IPSP. Graded afferent stimulation

-[,-/-T
F
_

DCA9

B

A

10 msec
HA

G

,7T10

EJ

4k
t

msec

+ 0-2 mV

Fig. 10. Intracellular responses of thalamo-cortical relay cells to graded afferent
volleys. Upper traces in A-E are intracellular potentials evoked by contralateral
M volleys, A being the just-threshold response and E the maximum. Membrane
potential -20 mV. Immediately below the TH traces are the corresponding
traces (CUN) from the surface of the contralateral cuneate nucleus. F-J are the
same series but at slower sweep speed. The voltage scale is for the TH records only.
K-N are a similar series for U volleys in another experiment: note separate voltage
scales for the TH and CUN traces. Same sweep speed as for A-E.

has been employed in attempting to discriminate between these dual
actions. Just-threshold stimulation of the M nerve in Fig. 10A, F,
appeared to evoke merely a small EPSP, but in B and C a slight increase
resulted in a dual response, the EPSP being followed within 2 msec by an
IPSP; and both became larger with further increase in the stimulus (C, D
and H, I). With maximal stimulation (E), there was a further large
increase of the IPSP. The slower traces of F-J illustrate the long duration
(about 100 msec) of the IPSP. In a comparable series with graded
stimulation in another experiment (Fig. 1OK-N) it is seen that the IPSP
was large (K) with a stimulus just above threshold.
In the preceding paper (Andersen, Brooks, Eccles & Sears, 1964) it
was shown that repetitive stimulation could maintain and even develop
a rhythmic burst discharge if the stimulation was at a frequency appropriate for resonance with the naturally occurring rhythm. Intracellular

THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
383
recording gives evidence relating to the mechanism of this resonance. In
Fig. IIA, F, a single cortical stimulus evoked an IPSP followed at 145
msec in A by a depolarization with superimposed spike discharge, then a
second IPSP with an irregular phase of depolarization, followed by a third
IPSP. In addition there were later small waves in the slower trace (F).
In D, with repetitive cortical stimulation at 6.9/sec, the second stimulus
arrived during the first burst discharge and sharpened the onset of the
second IPSP, with the consequence that there was an augmented depolarization with superimposed burst discharge on which the third stimulus was
IFll

A
Single

S'gle

/sec1

5.C6
6-9

_r

100msec

8-7_-;m

100 msec

Fig. 11. Intracellular responses of thalamo-cortical relay cell to repetitive cortical
stimulation. B-E are the responses of a TCR cell to repetitive stimulation of the
somato-sensory cortex at the indicated frequencies, the times of the actual stimuli
being indicated by dots. G-J are a similar series from the same TCR cell, but at a
slower sweep speed. A and F show the respective rhythmic responses evoked by
single cortical stimuli. d.c. amplification at the same gain was employed throughout.

superimposed. The subsequent third burst discharge occurred at a shorter
interval, so moving out of phase with the repetitive cortical stimulus.
Nevertheless, C and H show that, even when much later than the burst
discharges, the IPSP added by the cortical stimulus was effective in
augmenting and synchronizing the components of the next depolarization,
with the consequent enhancement of the superimposed burst discharge.
However, when too far out of phase (B, 0), the cortical stimulus had no
such adjuvant action. At the other extreme, too rapid a cortical stimulation (E, I, J) often prevented the depolarization from generating a burst

P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
384
discharge, though its regular production of IPSPs caused the IPSPs and
subsequent depolarizations to be strictly in phase; and this apparently
would continue indefinitely in I. It will be noted that in Fig. 11 the
cortical stimulus always gave effective antidromic invasion of the thalamic
cell when it was discharging spontaneously, but otherwise only in record G.
It will be noticed that in E, when the cortical stimulus forestalled the time
of the first burst discharge by less than 30 msec, it failed to generate a
burst discharge in the manner illustrated in Fig. 7G-J.
Figure 12 shows that, as with the IPSPs of other cells in the central
nervous system, an increased conductance of the inhibitory subsynaptic
membrane to chloride ions contributes to the generation of IPSPs (cf.
Eccles, 1964, Chapt. XI). By chance, a coarse NaCl electrode (2.5 MO
M-_-TCR cell

lllElo

mv

10 msec

8

10 msec

Dfj2m'v
C'C

msec
Fig. 12. Effect of increased intracellular chloride concentration on the IPSPs of a
TCR cell. Tmmediately after impalement by a relatively coarse NaCl electrode the
diphasic EPSP-IPSP response of A was recorded. Within a minute the response
B shows that the IPSP had been inverted to a depolarizing response that arose
from the initial EPSP at the inflexion signalled by the arrow. Note higher amplification, but same sweep speed. C and D show a further development of this
depolarizing transformation of the IPSP taken at a much lower sweep speed, with
an amplifier time constant in D of 1 sec.

resistance) that was being employed for extracellular recording impaled a
thalamic relay cell, M-nerve stimulation producing an EPSP followed
after about 1x3 msec by a brief hyperpolarizing IPSP (Fig. 12A). Within
a minute this hyperpolarization had inverted to a depolarization separated
from the original depolarization by an inflexion, the arrows in A and B
indicating corresponding times. Record C shows the further development
of this large depolarizing IPSP at a slower sweep speed, while at D the
time course was more accurately displayed, the amplifier time constant
being increased from 200 msec to 1 sec. Such inversion of IPSPs was
regularly observed when the impaling micro-electrodes were filled with
KCI or NaCl.
The pathway for post-synaptic inhibition
Afferent volleys produce an IPSP with such a short latency after the
EPSP that it must be generated by some pathway containing no more
than two or three synaptic relays. The cortical ablation experiments (Figs.
9, 11, 13; Andersen, Brooks, Eccles & Sears, 1964, Fig. 3) exclude a cortical
link in the inhibitory pathway. The very similar IPSPs generated by

385
THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
cortical stimulation, and the subsequent burst discharges, suggest that
the same pathway is operated by this stimulation. It has been postulated
(Andersen & Eccles, 1962) that this pathway is formed by axon collaterals
of thalamo-cortical relay cells exciting inhibitory interneurones in the
region of the ventro-basal complex of the thalamus and that their inhibitory synaptic action is widely distributed to the thalamo-cortical relay
cells. The inhibitory action would thus be a typical example of recurrent
inhibition as first defined in the inhibitory pathway through Renshaw cells
to motoneurones in the spinal cord (Eccles et al. 1954). However, an
A
SR

B

CORT

-__

/

E

F

G

H

CORT;

lme

;

II

m

msec____________

r

-1

100 msec

=

10

msec

=

Fig. 13. Intracellular responses of thalamo-cortical relay cells to afferent volleys
and to subcortical stimulation many days after ablation of the sensori-motor
cortex. In A-H the sensori-motor cortex had been removed aseptically 12 days
before. The intracellular responses of a TCR cell to contralateral nerve volleys and
to ipsilateral subcortical stimulation are shown at fast and slow sweeps as indicated,
and at same amplification, there being superposition of several traces with the
fast speeds. I, J are intracellular responses evoked by subcortical stimulation in
another TCR cell, and show the first burst response arising from a depolarization
much as in Fig. 9. Same voltage scale as for A-H, but in another experiment also
12 days after ablation of the sensori-motor cortex.

alternative postulate could be that the cortically evoked inhibition is due
to a pathway from cortical cells to the thalamus, for which experimental
evidence has been provided by Iwama & Yamamoto (1961) and by
Angel (1963), and not to antidromic activation of axon collaterals of the
thalamo-cortical relay cells.
In thirteen experiments this alternative postulate was tested after
operative ablation of the somato-sensory areas of the cortex and the
subsequent degeneration of any axons of cortical cells that could project
to the thalamus. As long as 12 days after the ablation there was typical
production of IPSPs in a thalamo-cortical relay cell both by afferent
volleys (Fig. 13A-F) and by stimulation of the white matter below the

386
P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
excised cortex (Fig. 13G, H). Furthermore, with all these stimuli there is
seen in B, D, F, H to be the typical rhythmic IPSP production. Since
stimulation of the white matter was just as effective as afferent nerve
volleys in producing the rhythmic IPSPs and superimposed burst discharges (Fig. 131, J), the postulate of their projection by cortico-thalamic
cells is not required. In these thirteen experiments the investigations were
carried out at a time adequate for degeneration of axons severed from their
cell bodies, but not long enough for the degeneration that occurs in
thalamo-cortical relay cells when their cortical terminals are ablated
(le Gros Clark & Powell, 1953).

The postulated cells on the post-synaptic inhibitory pathways
So far we have made only a preliminary attempt to discover the postulated inhibitory cells on the inhibitory pathway from the axon collaterals
of thalamo-cortical relay cells. Such cells should be synaptically excited
secondarily to any excitation of the thalamo-cortical relay cells, but never
invaded directly by antidromic impulses generated by cortical stimulation.
Further criteria possibly are that these cells should not themselves be
subjected to inhibition from the post-synaptic inhibitory pathway, and
that, when excited by afferent or antidromic volleys, they should often
fire repetitively for 10 or more milliseconds to give the prolonged rise to
the summit of the observed IPSP (cf. Figs. 8-13). In other respects, for
example, the participation in the burst discharges, these postulated
inhibitory cells would resemble the thalamo-cortical relay cells.
Figure 14 shows responses of the cell that best fulfilled these criteria
in our total of 167 thalamic neurones. In A and B, the SR and U volleys
evoked repetitive discharges starting at a latency of 5 msec from the
arrival of the orthodromic volleys in the cuneate nucleus, which would be
early enough for the observed onset of IPSPs (cf. Figs. 9, 10, 12, 13), and
continuing for over 20 msec. As shown in Fig. 14C, D, the cortical
stimulus generated a repetitive spike discharge with a latency of about
1-1 msec, and later inter-spike intervals of about 1.1, 1x9 and 2x1 msec
which are shown in the superimposed traces of D to constitute a very
reproducible repetitive response. The series of graded cortical stimuli in
E-H is remarkable in showing a very long latency of 3x5 msec for the
response to the just-threshold stimulus (E), and a progressive shortening of
latency and increase of frequency as the stimulus was increased in F-H.
Unfortunately, no slow records were taken to see if this cell participated
in the rhythmic burst discharges. However, the tests for inhibition were
of interest; an SR volley had no appreciable depressant action on the
excitatory response to a cortical stimulus until the conditioning-testing
interval was very short. There was a much more severe depression in the

THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
387
reverse sequence, cortical stimulus preceding SR. This could be due to the
cortically induced inhibition of thalamo-cortical relay cells (Andersen,
Brooks, Eccles & Sears, 1964) with the consequent failure of activation
by impulses in the axon collaterals. Since the cortical stimuli were applied
to the white matter after removal of the somato-sensory cortex, the
responses shown in Fig. 14 C-H must be attributed to a prolonged synaptic
excitation of this thalamic cell by a single volley of impulses, which
accords well with the postulate that the synaptic excitation is effected by
antidromic impulses acting through the axon collaterals of thalamocortical relay cells.
CORT

1r7jj
EVl

CORT

100miecHIH

sec~

~

~~me

Fig. 14. Exrtracellular responses of a presulmed post-synaptic inhibitory interneurone. Upper traces of A, B show repetitive spike responses to contralateral
SR and U volleys, the lower traces being the respective potentials from the dorsum
of the cuneate nucleus. a shows repetitive spike response to ipsilateral cortical
to
traces 174
the same sweep speed, while in D are four superimposed
stimulation at 25
Physiol.
this same stimulus but at higher sweep speed. The voltage scale for thalamic
records A-D is shown for upper trace of A, the cuneate scale being given on lower
trace. In E-H are responses to cortical stimuli, the numbers giving relative
strengths. Same voltage scale and sweep speed throughout.

i

In this same experiment there were less complete investigations on seven
other cells that were possibly post-synaptic inhibitory relay cells. They
were observed in two clusters, one including the cell shown in Fig. 14.
Also in other experiments there were brief test series on eight thalamic
cells that were not antidromically invaded, but were synaptically excited
by cortical stimulation, and which in other respects also appeared to
qualify as post-synaptic inhibitory relay cells.
25

Physiol. 174

I

388

P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS

The pathway for presynaptic inhibition
On analogy with the spinal cord (Eccles, Kostyuk & Schmidt, 1962) it
can be postulated that the pathway for presynaptic inhibition contains at
least one serially arranged interneurone, which would, of course, not be
antidromically invaded in response to a cortical stimulus; nor would it
be expected to be inhibited by a cortical stimulus. On the other hand, it
would be expected to respond to an afferent volley by a prolonged repetitive
discharge for 10 or more milliseconds in order to account for the prolonged
i CORT

+BSR

l 10msec f +02m
j

49/s.c+F30/sec
E 4

1c0

msec

Fig. 15. Responses of a presumed presynaptic inhibitory interneurone. The characteristic high-frequency responses to contralateral nerve volleys are shown in
B-D, there being two superimposed traces in ( and D, while in the five superimposed traces of A the cortical stimlulus failed not only to excite the cell but also
to inhibit the spontaneous discharge. In E the cell followed a stimulation frequency to SR nerve at 490/sec, while in F it even gave an interpolated response
when following 330/sec. E and F were taken during a brief repetitive stimulation,
the actual stimulus responsible for each spike being ma,ny milliseconds earlier than
the immediately preceding stimulus artifact.

rising phase of the presynaptic depolarization (Andersen, Brooks, Eccles &
Sears, 1964, Figs. 10, 11, 13). Another possible criterion would be absence
of synaptic activation by a cortical stimulus, for preliminary tests did not
disclose a prolonged presynaptic depolarization to such a stimulus
(Andersen, Brooks, Eccles & Sears, 1964, Fig. 12).
Figures 15, 16 show responses of a cell that qualified by all these criteria
as a presynaptic inhibitory interneurone. In Fig. 15 B, C, D it responded
to all three nerve volleys by a prolonged high-frequency discharge comparable with the discharges observed for assumed presynaptic inhibitory

THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
389
cells in the spinal cord, yet in A its spontaneous discharge was not affected
by a cortical stimulus. In Fig. 16I, J, K the rhythmic response to an SR
volley (delivered alone in F) was not affected by a preceding cortical
stimulus. However, in Fig. 16B-E a preceding SR stimulus depressed the

8SRR c
A SR
liuni iiiii>7 +

DE

1~~~~~

IOme
lme

CORT.JSR

U-SR

SR

E

Fig. 16. Conditioning of repetitive spike discharges of a presumed presynaptic
inhibitory interneurone. A and F show the repetitive spike discharges evoked by
a contralateral SR volley. In B-E this response is seen to be depressed by a preceding SR volley at four different test intervals. In G, H there is a similar depression
by a preceding U volley. However, in I-K a preceding cortical stimulus had no
appreciable effect. All responses are at same sweep speed, and voltage scales for
thalamic (upper) and cuneate (lower) responses are shown.

I+

SR

U

M

SR~~~~J~~4~~h.1~~~~
B

U

+

C
-

R

m

H

K

1Om TFIA
L

J

.u

md

mse

m.P
_

~

rr1rmse

Fig. 17. Intracellular responses from presumed presynaptic inhibitory interneurones. Upper traces are intracellular recordings from thalamic cells, lower
traces are from the surface of the cuneate nucleus. A-I are responses from one
presumed interneurone that gave initially spike responses to SR, M and U contralateral volleys (A, D, G). Later, spikes failed as the membrane potential fell. B,
E, H show EPSPs evoked by a progressively larger SR volley, and similarly C,
F, I for a U volley. Note separate voltage scales for each row ofthalamic responses,
but same cuneate scale throughout. J and K show pure EPSP responses to contralateral afferent volleys by two other presumed presynaptic inhibitory interneurones. Voltage scales for TH and CUN in J also obtain for K, but there are
separate time scales. All records are formed by the superposition of several traces.

response to a second SR, and in G, H a conditioning U volley produced a
similar depression of an SR response. This inhibition can be sufficiently
explained by the presynaptic inhibitory action on the terminals of the
25-2

390
P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
medial lemniscal fibres in the thalamus (Andersen, Brooks, Eccles & Sears,
1964, Figs. 9, 10, 12), which would depress their activation of presynaptic
inhibitory cells as well as of thalamo-cortical relay cells. Figure 15E, F
shows that this cell follows high frequency orthodromic stimulation, 490/sec
in E, while in F at 330/sec it even registers one double response. It will
be appreciated that in these continued repetitive responses the spikes are
not produced by the immediately preceding nerve stimulus.
Figure 17 shows examples of intracellular responses of a thalamic cell
that possibly could be a presynaptic inhibitory interneurone, though it
usually responded only once to an afferent volley (A, D, G). Later, when
the membrane potential had fallen, afferent volleys elicited merely EPSPs
of complex composition with later large superimposed EPSPs (B, C, E, F,
H, I). Presumably these EPSPs could in part arise from repetitive discharges of cuneate cells and in turn could be the basis of the prolonged
repetitive responses often observed (Fig. 15 B-D). This cell resembled that
of Figs. 15, 16 in being neither excited nor inhibited by cortical stimulation,
and its identification as a presynaptic inhibitory cell was also indicated
by the absence of all trace of an IPSP response. Figure 17J, K gives
examples of potentials evoked by afferent volleys in other thalamic cells,
there being prolonged EPSPs with no trace of IPSPs. Possibly these cells
are also interneurones on the presynaptic inhibitory pathway.
DISCUSSION

At the outset it is important to recognize that the criteria employed by
Poggio & Mountcastle (1963) for defining lemniscal neurones would obtain
not only for the thalamo-cortical relay (TCR) cells of Figs. 1-13, but also
for the other two cell types that we have attempted to recognize in relation
to the postulated interneurones on the post-synaptic (Fig. 14) and presynaptic inhibitory pathways (Figs. 15-17). Each type of interneurone
usually gave repetitive responses to single afferent volleys; and Fig. 15E
shows that a postulated presynaptic inhibitory cell followed a frequency
of stimulation of 490/sec. This is a performance superior to the great
majority of TCR cells, where no doubt the powerful and prolonged postsynaptic inhibitory action greatly impedes the ability to follow even
moderately high frequencies of stimulation. We can conclude that there is
no conflict between the exclusive identification of all VBC cells as lemniscal
neurones (Poggio & Mountcastle, 1963) and our postulate that the TCR
cells represent only a fraction of those VBC cells that are strongly excited
by lemniscal volleys.
Lemniscal neurones of the ventro-basal complex have been defined as
those neurones that respond to lemniscal volleys by a discharge that has

THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
391
a short latency and is often repetitive (Poggio & Mountcastle, 1963).
Lemniscal neurones that are antidromically activated from the somatosensory cortex have been classified as TCR cells; however, a negative
response to this test is indecisive. In part this 'negative' category can
be further subdivided into cells synaptically excited from the somatosensory cortex, and those not excited. The former would qualify as interneurones on the postulated post-synaptic inhibitory pathway from axon
collaterals of the TCR cells. The latter may be interneurones on the presynaptic inhibitory pathway. However, it must be recognized that some
cells failing to respond to the antidromic test may be TCR cells with axonal
terminals so remote that the cortical stimulus was ineffective. Two other
ancillary criteria are helpful in recognition of cells on the presynaptic
inhibitory pathway: on analogy with the spinal cord (Eccles et al. 1962)
it would be expected that interneurones on the presynaptic inhibitory
pathway are excited from a large cutaneous area as in Figs. 15 and 17;
and our experiments suggest that such interneurones, being subjected to
post-synaptic inhibition (Figs. 16, 17), fire in longer bursts and at higher
frequency (Fig. 15) than the TCR cells (Figs. 1C-E, 2, 5, 6).
An important finding is illustrated in Figs. 15A and 16I-K, where
cortical stimulation had no inhibitory action on spontaneous or evoked
discharges of the presumed presynaptic inhibitory interneurones. Cortical
stimulation was also without excitatory action on these interneurones,
which may be an important distinguishing feature from the post-synaptic
inhibitory interneurones (cf. Fig. 14), though more investigation is
required. There should be further investigation here in an attempt to
decide whether or not cortical stimulation exerts any appreciable presynaptic inhibition on TCR cells (cf. Andersen, Brooks, Eccles & Sears,
1964, Fig. 12).
There is a further criterion that may be important in distinguishing
between TCR cells and interneurones on either of the inhibitory pathways.
When recording intracellularly from cells that qualify as TCR on other
tests, large and prolonged IPSPs are always produced both by afferent
nerve volleys and by cortical stimulation (Figs. 8-13). In contrast, cells
that qualified as inhibitory interneurones on other tests have never
exhibited signs of post-synaptic inhibition (Figs. 14-17). Provisionally,
therefore, even when the full battery of distinguishing tests could not be
applied, all lemniscal cells responding by IPSPs have been classified as TCR
cells.
The simplest post-synaptic and presynaptic inhibitory pathways are
illustrated diagrammatically in Fig. 18A, B. Figure 18A will be discussed
in detail later. In accord with the preceding discussion, Fig. 18 B shows
an extensive convergence of collaterals from lemniscal fibres onto a pre-

P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
392
synaptic I cell, which in turn has synaptic endings on the excitatory
synapses of TCR cells in the manner typical for presynaptic inhibition
elsewhere (Eccles, 1964).
Of the total of 167 lemniscal neurones in which a provisional classification could be attempted on the basis of the criteria here considered, there
were 122 TCR cells, 16 post-synaptic and 29 presynaptic inhibitory relay
cells. It will be understood that this is merely an initial tentative classification in accordance with the postulated pathways in the ventro-basal complex and with the modes of excitatory and inhibitory action. In view of
A

B

Thalamus

Iost itI

cell

Meiat
lemniscus

cell

Fig. 18. Diagrams of postulated pathways for post-synaptic (A) and presynaptic
(B) inhibitory actions on tras.mision through the ventro-basal complex of the
thalamus. In A the axon collaterals of the TCR cells are seen to excite both TCR
cells and the post-synaptic inhibitory interneurone (POST I CELL), which is
widely distributed to the excitatory synapses on TCR cells. In B branches of
medial lemuniscal fibres excite the presynaptic inhibitory interneuron (PRE I
CELL), which is widely distributed to the synaptic knobs of lemniscal fibres.

the very powerful IPSPs of possibly all TCR cells, the proportion of postsynaptic inhibitory relay cells seems low. However, in the CA 1 and CAA3
zones of the hippocampus even larger IPSPs are produced in every
pyramidal cell by a population of basket cells that is relatively low
(Andersen, Eccles & L0yning, 1963, 1964a, 1964b). Histologically, basket
cells are distinguished by the profuseness of their terminal axonal branches
(Ramon y Cajal, 1911; Lorente de No, 1934) so that one basket cell
achieves synaptic contact with between 200 and 500 pyramidal cells. An
alternative explanation of the apparent sparseness of post-synaptic
inhibitory cells in the VBC may be that they are concentrated in more
peripheral zones of the VBC or even just beyond its confines, and so have
eluded our micro-electrode explorations, which were not systematically
applied to the whole VBC, but merely restricted to areas with a high
density of lemniscal cells and large field potentials.
Many weeks after excision of t,he somato-sensory cortex there is a wide-

THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
393
spread degeneration of the thalamic cells projecting to this cortex (Walker,
1938; Sheps, 1945; Combs, 1949, 1951; McLardy, 1950; Powell, 1952; le
Gros Clark & Powell, 1953) and even an almost total degeneration of the
VBC cells has been reported (le Gros Clark, 1936). However, most investigators have found that a considerable proportion of these cells survive
(see le Gros Clark & Powell, 1953), which could correlate with the present
provisional classification, according to which more than one quarter of
the VBC cells would be interneurones and hence not directly affected by
cortical ablation. It may further be noted that, if the post-synaptic
inhibitory relay cells depended wholly or in large part, for their activation,
on axon collaterals of thalamo-cortical relay (TCR) cells, they might also
suffer transneuronal degeneration when the TCR cells degenerated, as
has been suggested by Amassian (1952). Another possibility is that some
TCR cells survive cortical ablation because they have such a wealthy
plexus of axon collaterals in the thalamus. Evidently it is important to
have further histological investigation at various stages of the degeneration
following one or other of these operative procedures: cortical ablation,
and cutting of the medial lemniscus.
Before attempting to give an account of the way in which rhythmic
burst responses of TCR cells are generated, it is necessary to review the
evidence for the postulates that axon collaterals of TCR cells have both
an excitatory and an inhibitory action on TCR cells, this latter action of
course being mediated by interneurones. Figure 4 illustrates a common
finding that cortical stimulation may evoke a second or even a third discharge after the initial antidromic invasion of a TCR cell, and this second
discharge may arise from a prepotential resembling a synaptically induced
depolarization. In Fig. 2A signs of several spike potentials are also seen
superimposed on the slow negative wave that followed the initial antidromic spike potential, and this slow negative wave is also evident in
Fig. 8A. Synaptic excitatory action by axon collaterals is further indicated in Fig. 7 G-J, where, at an early stage of recovery from the P-wave,
cortical stimulation evoked a repetitive spike response.
The production of IPSPs by cortical stimulation is well illustrated in
Figs. 9, 11 and 130-J. The latency may be as brief as 2x0 msec (Andersen
& Eccles, 1962, Fig. 1 F), which allows time for the interposition of one
interneurone. The pathway would involve, in sequence, antidromic propagation from the cortex in the axons of TCR cells, then propagation through
axon collaterals to the inhibitory interneurones which are activated as
illustrated in Fig. 15. These in turn would generate IPSPs of the TCR cells,
as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 18A.
Intracellular recording from TCR cells (Figs. 8, 9, 11, 13) clearly establishes that the IPSP plays a dominant role in suppressing impulse discharge

394
P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
in the periods between the successive burst discharges. When TCR cells
are activated either by a lemniscal volley (Figs. 8B, 9A<-C) or by cortical
stimulation (Figs. 9D-I, 131, J), the abrupt onset of the IPSP cuts off
all further TCR cell discharges, and this can also be observed with extracellular recording (Figs. 2 F-I, 6). The same abrupt suppression of impulse
discharge by the IPSP can be recognized after the first burst discharge
in Figs. 9 B, C, F, G and 13I, J; but it is not so clearly defined in Fig. 2 F-I,
where the spike discharges became more out of phase with successive
bursts. For the present it is sufficient to note that the initial IPSP is
satisfactorily accounted for by the postulate that it is produced by
impulses discharged by TCR cells operating through their axon collaterals
on to inhibitory neurones, and so back to TCR cells as in Fig. 18A. The
repetitive discharge of inhibitory interneurones (see Fig. 14) accounts for
the long rising phase of the IPSP. In addition it must be postulated that
axon collaterals from many TCR cells converge on an individual inhibitory
interneurone, which, reciprocally, is widely distributed in its inhibitory
action on TCR cells. It is of interest that Ramon y Cajal (1791 1, Fig. 263)
illustrated thalamic cells with a considerable branching of their axon
collaterals.
Additional postulates are required in order to account for the generation
of the first burst discharge. First, it is postulated that late on the declining
phase of the IPSP the TCR cells are in the hyperexcitable phase of postanodal exaltation or 'rebound'. This effect has been demonstrated after
anodal polarization of spinal ganglion cells (Ito, 1957) or motoneurones
(Coombs, Curtis & Eccles, 1959; Araki, Ito & Oshima, 1961), and after
IPSPs both of motoneurones (Coombs, Eccles & Fatt, 1955) and of
pyramidal cells of the hippocampus (Kandel & Spencer, 1961). An additional explanation may be that a background of synaptic excitation brings
the cell to discharge as the IPSP declines. This background excitation
could be exercised by interneurones whose discharges could themselves
conceivably be phased by the rhythmic inhibitory process.
Those cells with the largest IPSPs would be the most likely to generate
a discharge late on the declining phase; and, because of the synchrony in
the generation of the IPSPs, all TCR cells recovering from large IPSPs
would be in a hyperexcitable state at this time. Thus, the first rhythmic
burst discharge in Figs. 9 and 13I, J may be sufficiently explained as the
reaction to post-anodal exaltation, with local responses growing up to full
size impulses, during the terminal stages of the IPSP. Direct excitability
testing has disclosed a phase of hyperexcitability of TCR cells that is
exactly synchronized with the burst discharge (Andersen, Brooks, Eccles &
Sears, 1964, Figs. 10, 11, 12). In addition to this spontaneous development
of post-anodal exaltation in the population of TCR cells, some sort of

395
THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
interaction between these cells is indicated by the synchronization of the
burst discharges of a population of TCR cells (Andersen, Brooks, Eccles &
Sears, 1964, Figs. 2, 5). In part this could be due to ephaptic interaction,
the impulses generated by the earliest discharging TCR cells triggering
by electrical current flow the discharges in neighbouring hyperexcitable
cells. However, the excitation of TCR cells by axon collaterals of other
TCR cells (Figs. 4, 18A) must play a significant role in this synchronization. This is particularly important in accounting for the discharge of
repetitive bursts and for the initiation of such discharges by a single
antidromic volley from the cortex (Fig. 7G-J).
The first burst discharge would again excite the inhibitory neurones
through the axon collaterals, and so again terminate itself by the IPSPs it
generated, from which recovery would again recur in a phase of exaltation
and generation of the second burst discharge, and so on. Provided that the
post-synaptic inhibition generated by each burst discharge is distributed
sufficiently widely to the thalamic neurones, there appears to be no need to
postulate any phasing device other than the rhythmically generated
IPSPs. Purpura & Cohen (1962) have proposed similarly that rhythmically
generated IPSPs are responsible for the phasing of the burst discharges,
but they did not envisage that the IPSP production could be due to a
recurrent inhibitory pathway through axon collaterals of TCR cells.
Figure 18A explains how the antidromic impulses evoked by stimulation
in the sensory cortex of the axonal terminals of thalamic neurones would
also activate the inhibitory neurones through the axon collaterals; hence
this stimulation should be just as effective as orthodromic activation in
evoking the rhythmic inhibitory post-synaptic potentials and the rhythmic
burst discharges from the thalamus. This is indeed observed with the
somato-sensory cortex (Figs. 2, 8, 9, 11, 13), and analogously Bishop &
Davis (1960) found that stimulation of the optic radiation evoked rhythmic
discharges of lateral geniculate neurones. Furthermore, the pathways of
Fig. 18A offer a satisfactory explanation of the way in which intercurrent
orthodromic (Andersen, Brooks, Eccles & Sears, 1964, Fig. 5A-G) or
antidromic (Fig. 9 J-L, N-P) stimulation affected the rhythmic burst
discharge.
It will be evident that the hypothesis here formulated belongs to the
category in which the duration of the rhythmic cycle is determined by the
intrinsic properties of the neurone, as has been proposed by Bremer (1949,
1953) and by Clare & Bishop (1956), and is not set by the transmission
time through a complex neuronal pathway. However, the hypothesis is
unique in that it has not previously been postulated that the essential
phasing device is due to widely dispersed inhibitory post-synaptic potentials that are generated through a recurrent pathway from axon collaterals.

396
P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS
It remains to suggest that the very large and prolonged recurrent inhibitory
post-synaptic potentials of neo-cortical and hippocampal pyramidal cells
(Phillips, 1959, 1961; Albe-Fessard, 1960; Kandel, Spencer & Brinley,
1961; Lux & Klee, 1962; Li & Chou, 1962; Andersen, Eccles & L0yning,
1963, 1964a, b) may also be similarly concerned as the phasing device for
the basic alpha and theta rhythm, respectively, the IPSPs contributing
very largely to the potential waves of these rhythms.
SUMMARY

1. By means of various experimental criteria it has been possible to
classify into three groups the cells of the ventro-basal complex of the
thalamus that are activated from the medial lemniscus (the so-called
lemniscal cells). Of a total of 167 lemniscal cells, the great majority (122)
were classified as thalamo-cortical relay (TCR) cells, the remainder being
presumed to be interneurones on inhibitory pathways, 16 post-synaptic
and 29 presynaptic inhibitory interneurones.
2. The two essential criteria for identifying TCR cells are synaptic
activation from a contralateral afferent nerve and antidromic invasion
from the ipsilateral somato-sensory cortex. The accumulated evidence
also indicates that, in contradistinction to the inhibitory interneurones,
all TCR cells are post-synaptically inhibited both by contralateral afferent
volleys and by stimulation of the ipsilateral somato-sensory cortex. This
post-synaptic inhibition is revealed both by a prolonged suppression of
spontaneous discharge and by inhibition of the response evoked by another
testing afferent volley.
3. Intracellular recording from TCR cells reveals large and prolonged
IPSPs, which, typically, are inverted by an increase in intracellular
chloride concentration. These IPSPs are produced by subcortical stimulation after degeneration of all cortico-thalamic fibres. In addition, their
short latency conforms with the postulate that they are generated by a
typical recurrent inhibitory pathway, axon collaterals of TCR cells to
post-synaptic inhibitory interneurones and so to inhibitory synapses on
TCR cells. In accord with this postulate the latency of the monosynaptic
EPSPs produced by lemniscal volleys is found to be at least 1'5-2 msec
shorter than the earliest IPSPs.
4. Intracellular recording from TCR cells demonstrates the dominant
role of the IPSPs in generating and in phasing the rhythmic potential
waves with superimposed burst discharges that are such a characteristic
feature of thalamic responses to orthodromic or antidromic stimulation.
5. By definition neither type of interneurone is antidromically invaded
in response to cortical stimuli. In accord with the above postulate of

THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION
397
recurrent inhibition, those interneurones synaptically activated in response to cortical stimuli are regarded as being post-synaptic inhibitory
interneurones. Besides this negative criterion for their identification,
presynaptic inhibitory interneurones also give prolonged high-frequency
discharges in response to a wide variety of afferent volleys, and these
discharges are not affected when post-synaptic inhibitory action suppresses
TCR discharges.
6. An hypothesis is developed that accounts for all the findings as to
rhythmic thalamic responses to orthodromic and antidromic activation.
Essentially the phasing of the rhythm is attributed to a widespread
recurrent IPSP that is produced by the discharges of TCR cells, while the
subsequent burst discharge is attributed to the post-anodal exaltation or
rebound that occurs on recovery from the prolonged large IPSPs. The
demonstrated positive feedback by excitatory axon collaterals will
account for the rapid spread of this excitation through the population of
TCR neurones, but ephaptic spread may also contribute to the first burst
discharge. This burst discharge of course immediately results in a second
recurrent IPSP of the TCR population, which again recovers to the second
burst discharge, and so on.
REFERENCES

ALBE-FESSARD, D. (1960). Sur l'origine des ondes lentes observees en d6rivation intracellulaire dans divers structures cer6brales. (C.R. Soc. Biol., Pari8, 154, 11-16.
AiAssiAN, V. E. (1952). Interaction in the somatovisceral projection system. Re8. Publ.
A88. nerv. ment. Di8. 30, 371-402.
ANDERSEN, P., BROOKS, C. McC. & EccisS, J. C. (1964). Electrical responses of the ventrobasal nucleus of the thalamus, pp. 100-113. In Progres8 in Brain Re8earch. Ed. W.
BARGMANN and J. P. ScIrAD. Amsterdam: Elsevier Publishing Company.
ANDERSEN, P., BRooKs, C. McC., EccLEs, J. C. & SEARs, T. A. (1964). The ventro-basal
nucleus of the thalamus: potential fields, synaptic transmission and excitability of both
presynaptic and post-synaptic components. J. Physiol. 174, 348-369.
ANDERSEN, P. & ECCLES, J. C. (1962). Tnhibitory phasing of neuronal discharge. Nature,
Lond., 196, 645-647.
ANDERSEN, P., ECCLEs, J. C. & LOYNING, Y. (1963). Recurrent inhibition in the hippocampus
with identification of the inhibitory cell and its synapses. Nature, Lond., 198, 540-541.
ANDERSEN, P., ECCLES, J. C. & L0YNING, Y. (1964a). Location of post-synaptic inhibitory
synapses on hippocampal pyramids. J. Neurophy8iol. 27. (In the Press.)
ANDERSEN, P., ECCLES, J. C. & LOYNING, Y. (1964b). Pathway of post-synaptic inhibition
in the hippocampus. J. Neurophy8iol. 27. (In the Press.)
ANDERSEN, P., EccLEs, J. C., SCHMDT, R. F. & YOKOTA, T. (1964). Depolarization of
presynaptic fibers in the cuneate nucleus. J. Neurophy8iol. 27, 92-106.
ANGEL, A. (1963). Evidence for cortical inhibition of transmission at the thalamic relay
nucleus in the rat. J. Phy8iol. 169, 108-109 P.
ANGEL, A. & DAWSON, G. D. (1963). The facilitation of thalamic and cortical responses in
the dorsal column sensory pathway by strong peripheral stimulation. J. Phy8iol. 166,
587-604.

ARAK, T., ITO, M. & OSTMAs, T. (1961). Potential changes produced by application of
current steps to motoneurones. Nature, Lond., 191, 1104-1105.
BISHOP, P. 0. & DAvIs, R. (1960). Synaptic potentials, after-potentials and slow rhythms
of lateral geniculate neurones. J. Phy8iol. 154, 514-546.

398

P. ANDERSEN, J. C. ECCLES AND T. A. SEARS

BREMER, F. (1949). Considerations sur l'origine et la nature des 'ondes' cerebrales. Electroenceph. clin. Neurophysiol. 1, 177-193.
BREMER, F. (1953). Some Problems in Neurophysiology. University of London: The
Athlone Press.
BROcK, L. G., CooMBs, J. S. & ECCLES, J. C. (1953). Intracellular recording from antidromically activated motoneurones. J. Physiol. 122, 429-461.
CLARE, M. H. & BISHOP, G. H. (1956). Potential wave mechanisms in cat cortex. Electroenceph. clin. Neurophysiol. 8, 583-602.
CLARK, W. E., LE GROS (1936). The termination of ascending tracts in the thalamus of the
macaque monkey. J. Anat., Lond., 71, 7-40.
CLARK, W. E., LE GROS & POWELL, T. P. S. (1953). On the thalamo-cortical connexions
of the general sensory cortex of Macaca. Proc. Roy. Soc. B, 141, 467-487.
COMwS, C. M. (1949). Fiber and cell degeneration in the albino rat brain after hemidecortication. J. comp. Neurol. 90, 373-402.
ComlBs, C. M. (1951). The distribution and temporal course of fiber degeneration after
experimental lesions in the rat brain. J. comp. Neurol. 94, 123-175.
COOMBS, J. S., CUxTIS, D. R. & ECCLES, J. C. (1959). The electrical constants of the motoneurone membrane. J. Phy8iol. 145, 505-528.
CooMBs, J. S., ECCLES, J. C. & FATT, P. (1955). The electrical properties of the motoneurone membrane. J. Physiol. 130, 291-325.
ECCLES, J. C. (1964). The Physiology of Synapses. Berlin, Gottingen, Heidelberg: Springer-

Verlag.
EccLEs, J. C., FATT, P. & KOKETSU, K. (1954). Cholinergic and inhibitory synapses in a
pathway from motor-axon collaterals to motoneurones. J. Physiol. 126, 524-562.
EccLEs, J. C., KoSTYIJE, P. G. & SCHMIDT, R. F. (1962). Central pathways responsible for
depolarization of primary afferent fibres. J. Physiol. 161, 237-257.
FATT, P. (1957). Electric potentials occurring around a neurone during its antidromic
activation. J. Neurophysiol. 20, 27-60.
ITO, M. (1957). The electrical activity of spinal ganglion cells investigated with intracellular
microelectrodes. Jap. J. Physiol. 7, 297-323.
IWAMA, K. & YAMAMOTO, C. (1961). Impulse transmission of thalamic somato-sensory relay
nuclei as modified by electrical stimulation of the cerebral cortex. Jap. J. Physiol. 11,
169-182.
KANDEL, E. R. & SPENCER, W. A. (1961). Electrophysiology of hippocampal neurons. II.
After-potentials and repetitive firing. J. Neurophysiol. 24, 243-259.
KANDEL, E. R., SPENCER, W. A. & BRINLEY, F. J. (1961). Electrophysiology of hippocampal neurons. 1. Sequential invasion and synaptic organization. J. Neurophysiol. 24,
225-242.
Li, C-L. & CHOU, S. N. (1962). Cortical intracellular synaptic potentials and direct cortical
stimulation. J. Cell. Comp. Physiol. 60, 1-16.
LORENTE DE No, R. (1934). Studies on the structure of the cerebral cortex. II. Continuation of the study of the ammonic system. J. Psychol. Neurol., Lpz., 46, 113-177.
Lux, H. D. & KLEE, M. R. (1962). Intracelluliare Untersuchungen uber den Einfluss
hemmender Potentiale im motorischen Cortex. 1. Die Wirkung elektrischer Reizung
unspecifischer Thalamuskerne. Arch. Psychiat. Nerv Krankh. 203, 648-666.
McLARDY, T. (1950). Thalamic projection to frontal cortex in man. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiat. 13, 198-202.
MARSHALL, W. H. (1941). Observations on subcortical somatic sensory mechanisms of cats
under nembutal anaesthesia. J. Neurophysiol. 4, 25-43.
MOUJNTCASTLE, V. B. & HENNEMAN, E. (1949). Pattern of tactile representation in thalamus
of cat. J. Neurophysiol. 12, 85-100.
MOIJNTCASTLE, V. B. & HENNEMAN, E. (1952). The representation of tactile sensibility
in the thalamus of the monkey. J. comp. Neurol. 97, 409-431.
PHILLIPS, C. G. (1959). Actions of antidromic pyramidal volleys on single Betz cells in the
cat. Quart. J. exp. Physiol. 44, 1-25.
PHILLIPS, C. G. (1961). Some properties of pyramidal neurones of the motor cortex, pp. 424. Ciba Symposium on 'The Nature of Sleep'. Ed. G. E. W. WOLSTENHOLME and M.
O'CONNOR. London: J. and A. Churchill.

THALAMIC CELLS AND ORGANIZATION

399

POGGIO, G. F. & MOU-NTCASTLE, V. B. (1963). The functional properties of ventrobasal
thalamic neurons studied in unanesthetized monkeys. J. Neurophy8iol. 26, 775-806.
POWELL, T. P. S. (1952). Residual neurons in the human thalamus following hemidecortication. Brain, 75, 571-584.
PulRPURA, D. P. & COHEN, B. (1962). Intracellular recording from thalamic neurones
during recruiting response. J. Neurophy8iol. 25, 621-635.
PURPuR.A, D. P. & SHOFER, R. J. (1963). Intracellular recording from thalamic neurons
during reticulocortical activation. J. Neurophy8iol. 26, 494-505.
RAmoN Y CAJTAL, S. (1911). Hi8tologie du 8y8teme nerveux de l'homme et de8 vertebr68. II,
993 pp. Paris: Maloine.
ROSE, J. E. & MOUNTCASME, V. B. (1952). The thalamic tactile region in rabbit and cat.
J. comp. Neurol. 97, 441-490.
RosE, J. E. & MOUNTCASME, V. B. (1954). Activity of single neurons in the tactile thalamic
region of the cat in response to a transient peripheral stimulus. Bull. Johns Hopk. Ho8p.
94, 238-282.
SHEPS, J. G. (1945). The nuclear configuration and cortical connections of the human
thalamus. J. comp. Neurot. 83, 1-56.
WALKER, A. E. (1938). The Primate Thalamu8. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

