Journal of Physiology (1993), 468, pp. 669-691
With 12 figures
Printed in Great Britain

669

MECHANISMS OF OSCILLATORY ACTIVITY IN GUINEA-PIG
NUCLEUS RETICULARIS THALAMI IN VITRO: A MAMMALIAN
PACEMAKER
BY THIERRY BAL AND DAVID A. McCORMICK
From the Section of Neurobiology, Sterling Hall of Medicine C303, Yale University
Medical School, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06510, USA

(Received 3 September 1992)
SUMMARY

1. The ionic mechanisms of rhythmic burst firing and single spike, tonic
discharge were investigated with extracellular and intracellular recordings of single
neurones in the guinea-pig nucleus reticularis thalami (NRT) maintained as a slice
in vitro.
2. Activation of cortical/thalamic afferents to NRT neurones resulted in a short
latency burst of action potentials which could be followed by a rhythmic sequence
of oscillatory burst firing. Intracellularly, this oscillatory activity was associated
with an alternating sequence of low threshold Ca2" spikes separated by afterhyperpolarizing potentials. Intracellular injection of short duration hyperpolarizing
current pulses resulted in a similar sequence of oscillatory burst firing, suggesting
that this activity is an intrinsic property of NRT cells. The frequency of rhythmic
burst firing was highly voltage and temperature dependent and was between
7-12 Hz at -65 to -60 mV at 38 'C. In addition, at depolarized membrane
potentials, oscillatory burst firing was typically followed by a prolonged tail of
single spike activity.
3. Application of the Na+ channel poison tetrodotoxin blocked the generation of
fast action potentials, but left intact the rhythmic sequence of low threshc.ld Ca2"
spikes separated by after-hyperpolarizing potentials (AHPs). The reversal potential
of the AHPs was -94 mV, suggesting that it was mediated by an increase in K+
conductance. Extracellular application of tetraethylammonium or apamin, or
intracellular injection of Cs' or the Ca2" chelating agent EGTA, blocked the Ca2"
spike AHP, indicating that it is mediated by a Ca2"-activated K+ current.
4. Block of the AHP resulted in the marked enhancement of a slow afterdepolarizing potential (ADP). The slow ADP occurred only following the generation
of low threshold Ca2" spikes. Replacement of extracellular Ca2" with Mg2+ or Sr21
resulted in an abolition of the slow ADP. In addition, the increase in [Mg2+].
resulted in an abolition of the low threshold Ca2+ spike. In contrast, replacement of
extracellular Ca2+ with Ba2' did not abolish the slow ADP. These results indicate
that the ADP can be activated by either Ca2+ or Ba2+, but not by Mg2+ or Sr2".
5. Replacement of extracellular Na+ with choline+ did not abolish the slow ADP,
while replacement with N-methyl-D-glucamine+ did, indicating that the slow ADP
MS 1747

670

T. BAL AND D. A. McCORMICK

can be supported by choline+, but not by N-methyl-D-glucamine'. Neither
chemical affected the low threshold Ca2" spike. These results are consistent with the
slow ADP being mediated by a Ca2"-activated non-selective cation (CAN) current.
6. Application of maximal doses of noradrenaline resulted in a shift to highly
regular single spike activity at 30-40 Hz at 38 °C, while maximal doses of serotonin
or the glutamate metabotropic receptor agonist IS,3R-1-aminocyclopentane-1,3dicarboxylic acid (ACPD) resulted in peak firing frequencies of 55-65 Hz at 38 'C.
Intracellularly, this shift to tonic firing was associated with depolarization of the
membrane and a decrease in apparent input conductance.
7. Application of tetrodotoxin during tonic, single spike activity induced by
serotonin resulted in abolition of Na+ spikes and a hyperpolarization of the
membrane potential of 3-6 mV, indicating that the persistent Na+ current
contributes substantially to the determination of the frequency of action potential
discharge during this mode of activity.
8. We suggest that nucleus reticularis neurones possess three distinct modes of
oscillatory activity: (1) slow (0 5-7 Hz) rhythmic burst firing at hyperpolarized
membrane potentials resulting from the interaction of the low threshold Ca2+
current and a Ca2+-activated K+ current; (2) rhythmic burst firing in the frequency
range of spindle waves (7-12 Hz) followed by a tonic 'tail' of single spike activity
resulting from the interaction of the low threshold Ca2+ current and an apaminsensitive, Ca2+-activated K+ current and the activation of a Ca2+-activated nonselective cation (CAN) current; and (3) tonic, 30-60 Hz single spike activity which
appears during maximal block of resting, leak K+ current by 5-HT, noradrenaline
or ACPD and which results from an new equilibrium between the currents involved
in action potential generation and the persistent Na+ current.
INTRODUCTION

The nucleus reticularis thalami (NRT) forms a shell that surrounds much of the
dorsal and lateral extent of the dorsal thalamus (Jones, 1985). It is composed of
GABAergic neurones and projects heavily to nearly every nucleus of the thalamus,
and innervates relay cells (Houser, Vaughn, Barber & Roberts, 1980; Steriade,
Parent & Hada, 1984; Yen, Conley, Hendry & Jones, 1985). Thalamocortical and
corticothalamic fibres densely innervate the NRT with axon collaterals as the
parent axons transverse this structure (Ohara & Lieberman, 1981, 1985; Harris,
1987). In addition, neurones in the NRT are also innervated by noradrenergic fibres
from the locus coeruleus (see Asanuma, 1992), serotoninergic fibres from the raphe
(Wilson & Hendrickson, 1988; Lavoie & Parent, 1991), cholinergic fibres from the
brainstem and basal forebrain cholinergic groups (Hallanger, Levey, Lee, Rye &
Wainer, 1987; Levey, Hallanger & Wainer, 1987; Steriade, Parent, Pare & Smith,
1987 b; Asanuma, 1989), and GABAergic fibres from the basal forebrain, substantia
nigra reticulata, and the external field of the globus pallidus (Asanuma, 1989;
Asanuma & Porter, 1990; Pare, Hazrati, Parent & Steriade, 1990; Hazrati &
Parent, 1991). Local axon collaterals within the NRT, as well as dendrodendritic
synapses in the cat and primate, serve as an additional source of GABAergic
innervation of these neurones (see Deschenes, Madariaga-Domich & Steriade, 1985;

NRT RHYTHMIC BURST FIRING

671

Yen et al. 1985; Shosaku, Kayama, Sumitomo, Sugitani & Iwama, 1989).
In vivo, NRT cells display two distinct modes of action potential generation:
rhythmic burst firing during periods of synchronized electroencephalogram
activity such as during slow wave sleep (Mulle, Madariaga & Deschenes, 1986;
Steriade, Domich & Oakson, 1986) and absence seizures (Buzs'aki, Bickford,
Ponomareff, Thal, Mandel & Gage, 1988) and single spike firing during wakefulness
or rapid-eye-movement sleep (Mukhametov, Rizolatti & Seitun, 1970 a;
Mukhametov, Rizzolatti & Tradardi, 1970 b; Steriade et al. 1986). Spontaneous
rhythmic burst firing during slow-wave sleep in the NRT often occurs during the
generation of 'spindle' waves in which 1-2 s duration epochs of rhythmic, high
frequency (250-500 Hz) bursts of action potentials are generated at an interburst
frequency of between 7 and 14 Hz (see Steriade & Deschenes, 1984). Similarly,
activation of corticothalamic afferents during periods of drowsiness, anaesthesia, or
slow-wave sleep also result in the appearance of rhythmic burst firing in NRT
neurones in the frequency range of spindle oscillations (e.g. Mulle et al. 1986).
Intracellular recordings in vivo indicate that this activity is generated through the
interaction of the arrival of barrages of excitatory postsynaptic potentials,
presumably from bursting relay neurones and the low threshold Ca2" spike of NRT
cells (Mulle et al. 1986; Shosaku et al. 1989). Although the relative importance of
synaptic and intrinsic properties of NRT cells to the generation of spindle
oscillations are not yet clear, isolation of the NRT from all cortical and thalamic
inputs has been reported to leave a nucleus in which the ability to generate spindlelike oscillations, either spontaneously or in response to electrical stimulation of the
cut corticothalamic fibres, remains intact (Steriade, Domich & Oakson, 1987 a). This
result implies that the NRT contains within it the neural mechanisms required to
generate rhythmic spindle-like oscillations. Indeed, intracellular recordings in
guinea-pig NRT neurones maintained in vitro have revealed these cells to have the
intrinsic ability to generate rhythmic low threshold Ca2"-spike mediated bursts of
action potentials (Avanzini, de Curtis, Panzica & Spreafico, 1989; McCormick &
Wang, 1991), an oscillatory activity which has been proposed to arise from the
interaction of the low threshold Ca2+ current and a Ca2+-activated K+ current
(Avanzini et al. 1989).
The transition from slow-wave sleep to the waking state is associated with an
abolition of rhythmic burst firing and the appearance of tonic, single spike activity
in NRT neurones (Steriade et al. 1986). In behaving animals, this tonic activity
often occurs as periods of highly regular discharge in the frequency range of
30-60 Hz (Mukhametov et al. 1970 b; Marczynski, Burns, Livezey, Vimal & Chen,
1984). Recently, Pinault & Deschenes (1992 a, b) have proposed that this activity
arises from an interaction of the intrinsic membrane properties of NRT cells and
the actions of modulatory neurotransmitters, particularly noradrenaline and
acetylcholine, which are known to have potent excitatory and inhibitory effects,
respectively, on these cells (McCormick & Prince, 1986; McCormick & Wang, 1991).
In the present report we investigate the ionic mechanisms by which NRT
neurones generate rhythmic burst firing in the frequency range of spindle waves
and tonic, single spike activity in the 30-80 Hz range.

672

T. BAL AND D. A. McCORMICK
METHODS

Methods for preparation of thalamic slices and recording from NRT neurones are similar to
those published previously (McCormick & Wang, 1991). Male or female adult, Hartley guineapigs were deeply anaesthetized with sodium pentobarbitone (35 mg/kg i.P.) and killed by
decapitation. The region of brain containing the reticular thalamic nucleus was removed, placed
in cold (5°C) bathing solution, and sectioned as 400jum thick slices on a Vibratome (Pelco, Irvine,
CA, USA). Thalamic slices were placed in an interface-style recording chamber (Fine Science
Tools, Foster City, CA, USA) and allowed to recover for at least 2 h before recording commenced.
The bathing medium contained (mM): NaCl, 124; KCl, 2-5; MgSO4, 1-2; NaPO4, 1P25; CaCl2, 2;
NaHCO3, 26; dextrose, 10 and was aerated with 95 % 02-5 % CO2 to a final pH of 7-4. Recordings
were made with the slices typically at the temperature of 35-5°C, unless otherwise indicated.
Agonists were dissolved in the bathing medium and were applied with the pressure-pulse
technique in which a brief pulse of pressure (10-100 ms; 200-350 kPa) to a broken micropipette
(tip diameter 2-10 #sm) was used to extrude volumes of 2-20 pl. Antagonists were typically
applied through addition to the bathing medium. Extracellular single unit recordings were
obtained with tungsten microelectrodes (Frederick Haer Corporation, Brunswick, ME, USA),
while intracellular recordings were obtained with microelectrodes formed on a Sutter
Instruments (Novato, CA, USA) P-80/PC micropipette puller, filled with 4 M potassium acetate,
and bevelled to a final resistance of 70-100 MCI. Bevelled electrodes with a relatively high
resistance were found to be necessary to obtain high quality intracellular recordings from NRT
cells without substantial damage to the neurone.
The NRT of the guinea-pig was readily visible in the dissecting microscope or to the unaided
eye during the course of the experiments. Immunohistochemical staining for the GABA
synthetic enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase has previously been performed to confirm our
localization of this nucleus in this recording situation (McCormick & Prince, 1986).
Extracellular single unit recordings were displayed on a chart recorder (Gould Instruments,
Cleveland, OH, USA) by conversion of the data to an average spike frequency histogram through
a comparator, counter and digital-to-analog converter (e.g. Fig. 10). Each occurrence of an action
potential is reflected as a step increment in pen position on the chart recorder. After a pre-set
time period (typically 2 s) the counter was reset. Therefore the height of each bin is
representative of the average firing rate during that time period.
RESULTS

Intracellular recordings were obtained from ninety-three neurones and
extracellular recordings from twenty-nine neurones in the guinea-pig nucleus
reticularis thalami. Extracellular recordings from neurones in the guinea pig NRT
revealed that these cells typically are either silent or discharging in a tonic, single
spike manner. Electrical stimulation of the axons lateral to the NRT, which
contains the corticothalamic tract, resulted in a burst of action potentials in NRT
cells followed by a cessation of activity for about 1 s. This silent period could be
followed by a sequence of 1-10 high frequency (250-400 Hz) burst discharges, which
occurred at a rate of 3-7 Hz at 35 °C (Fig. 1A). Intracellular recordings of this
activity revealed that it was associated with a fast EPSP-mediated burst of action
potentials, as reported previously (Mulle et al. 1986; de Curtis, Spreafico &
Avanzini, 1989), followed by a hyperpolarization and a subsequent rhythmic
sequence of low threshold Ca2"-spike mediated bursts and after-hyperpolarizations
(Fig. 1B). Hyperpolarization of the neurone blocked the oscillatory activity and did
not reveal any underlying synaptic events which may generate this activity
(except for the initial EPSP), suggesting that it may be an intrinsic oscillation (not

shown).

NRT RHYTHMIC BURST FIRING

673

Intracellular injection of hyperpolarizing and depolarizing current pulses into
NRT cells revealed the generation of action potentials in two distinct modes:
rebound rhythmic burst firing and tonic, single spike activity (Fig. 2). As with
synaptic activation, rebound rhythmic burst firing was associated with the
A

Extracellular

B

Intracellular

is

1 s

Fig. 1. Rhythmic response of nucleus reticularis cells to orthodromic activation. A,
electrical stimulation of afferents lateral to the NRT results in a burst of action potentials
followed by an inhibitory pause, followed by rhythmic burst firing in a guinea-pig NRT
cell recorded extracellularly. B, intracellular recording of this activity revealed that the
burst of action potentials is associated with a large excitatory postsynaptic potential
followed by a hyperpolarization of the membrane potential and the rhythmic appearance
of low threshold Ca2" spike-mediated bursts of action potentials and burst afterhyperpolarizations (spike threshold is -55 mV).

rhythmic occurrence of low threshold Ca2" spikes and after-hyperpolarizations
(Fig. 2A), with the number of action potentials occurring during each high
frequency burst discharge gradually decreasing and giving way to a tonic 'tail' of
single spike activity (Fig. 2A). Depolarization of NRT cells from resting membrane
potential resulted in the occurrence of single spike activity with a threshold firing
rate of around 10 Hz, with little evidence of spike frequency adaptation (Fig. 2C).
In contrast to relay neurones in the lateral geniculate nuclei, the transition
between rhythmic burst firing and single spike activity could occur with
depolarization of the membrane potential of only a few millivolts, a finding which
may result from the depolarized level of T-current (transient-current) activation in
these cells (Huguenard & Prince, 1992). This is well illustrated with the injection of
triangular current pulses (Fig. 2E). Here, during the rising phase of the current
pulse, NRT cells generate first a rhythmic sequence of burst discharges followed by
single spike activity, which is then itself followed by the transition to single spike
activity only after an additional few millivolts of depolarization (Fig. 2E).
Changes in the baseline membrane potential of NRT cells through the
intracellular injection of current resulted in repeatable and typical changes in the

T. BAL AND D. A. McCORMICK

674

pattern of activity generated following the offset of a hyperpolarizing current
pulse. For example, in the cell illustrated in Fig. 3A, injection of a hyperpolarizing
current pulse at -70 mV results in two rebound burst discharges with an interburst
frequency of 2-4 Hz. Depolarization of the neurone to -67 and -64 mV results in a
A

Rebound oscillations

B

C

Tonic firing

D

E

0-5 nA

-70 mV

J20 mV
200 ms

Fig. 2. Rebound oscillatory and tonic firing properties of NRT cells. A, injection of a
hyperpolarizing current pulse at -68 mV results in a rebound period of rhythmic burst
firing followed by tonic, single spike activity. B, expansion of two of the rhythmic bursts
in A for detail. C, depolarization of a NRT cell results in highly regular single spike
activity at 12 Hz. D, expanded portions of C shown for detail. E, intracellular injection of a
triangular current pulse illustrates the voltage dependence of the different firing modes of
NRT cells. All time scale bars are 200 ms and voltage scale bars are 20 mV. A-D are from
the same neurone.

substantial increase in both the number of bursts generated and the interburst
frequency. Additional depolarization to -61 mV increased the interburst frequency
to approximately 11-15 Hz and enhanced the occurrence of a prolonged tail of
single spike activity following rhythmic burst firing (Fig. 3A, -61 mV).
Interestingly, as the tonic tail of single spike activity failed, a depolarizing
potential occurred in the temporally correct position for the generation of the next
action potential (Fig. 3A, -61 and -64 mV). Although the ionic basis of this
depolarizing potential has not been investigated, we suggest that it may have a
significant contribution from the low threshold Ca2" current and result from the deinactivation of a portion of this current by the single spike after-hyperpolarization
(AHP). This finding indicates that the low threshold Ca2` current may contribute
significantly to single spike activity, although this hypothesis remains to be tested.

NRT RHYTHMIC BURST FIRING6

675

The intrinsic nature of the oscillatory burst firing is indicated by the lack of
rhythmic synaptic potentials upon hyperpolarization, the sensitivity of the
frequency of oscillation on the membrane potential of the cell (Fig. 3A), and the
effects of block of voltage-dependent Na+ channels with tetrodotoxin (Fig. 3B and

_61 mV

-67

1

1

_

B

Control

C

Tetrodotoxin

200 ms

1 20 mrV
05 nA

Fig. 3. Voltage dependence of rhythmic burst firing followed by tonic activity. A, injection
of a hyperpolarizing current pulse into a guinea-pig NRT cell at -61 mV results in a
rebound sequence of rhythmic bursts at approximately 11-15 Hz followed by a tonic tail of
single spike activity. Note the subthreshold depolarizing potential which follows this tonic
activity (arrow). Hyperpolarization of the cell to -64 mV reduces the tonic tail of activity
and reveals rhythmic burst firing at 7-11 Hz. Hyperpolarization of the cell to -67 and
-70 mV further reduces the sequence of activity and slows the frequency of rhythmic
burst firing. B, intracellular injection of a hyperpolarizing current pulse results in a
rebound oscillatory burst sequence followed by short period of single spike activity. C, local
application of tetrodotoxin (10 /AM in micropipette) results in an abolition of the fast spikes
and reveals the underlying sequence of low threshold Ca2" spikes. A and B-C are recorded
from two different cells.

C). Local application of tetrodotoxin (10 /SM in micropipette) resulted in the
abolition of Na+ action potentials and revealed the underlying low threshold Ca2"
spikes (Fig. 3B and C). These Ca2" spikes were often associated with a preservation
of the after-hyperpolarization which occurs in between each Ca2` spike (Fig. 3 C;
n = 10), although in some neurones this after-hyperpolarization was reduced by
application of tetrodotoxin (n = 7). The latter finding indicates that the Na+dependent action potentials contribute to the after-hyperpolarization either

T. BAL AND D. A. McCORMICK

676

through the additional entry of Ca21 into the cell (such as through high threshold
Ca21 channels), or through the release of inhibitory neurotransmitters, such as
GABA, which may then also contribute to the AHP.
0-1 mM picrotoxin

B a

Control

A a

20 mV

100 ms
b

bj

C

A

-85 mv

GABA

GABA

C a 0-1 mM picrotoxin

D a

b
-59 MV

5

picrotoxin
+
1 mM saclofen

01 mM

b
_

GABA

100 ms
--~

GABJ 20 mV
5s

Fig. 4. Lack of effect of block of GABAA- or GABAB-mediated responses on rebound,
rhythmic burst firing in NRT cells. A a, injection of a hyperpolarizing current pulse at
-64 mV results in a rhythmic sequence of two burst discharges. Prolonged (A b) or brief
(Ac) application of GABA results in a hyperpolarizing response and an increase in
membrane conductance, which reverses around -74 mV. B, bath application of picrotoxin
(100 FM) does not affect rebound rhythmic burst firing (Ba), and transforms the GABA
response to one typical for activation of GABAB receptors, in which the reversal potential
is around -85 mV in this cell. C, injection of a hyperpolarizing current pulse at -65 mV
results in a rhythmic sequence of burst firing in a cell obtained in 100 /M picrotoxin while
application of GABA results in a hyperpolarization. Local application of the GABAB
antagonist 2-hydroxy-saclofen blocks the response to GABA, but does not affect rhythmic
burst firing in this cell. Same cells before and after antagonist application.

To test the possible involvement of activation of GABAergic receptors in the
generation of rhythmic burst firing, we applied the GABAA antagonist picrotoxin
(100 ,/M in bath) and the GABAB antagonist 2-hydroxy-saclofen (1 mm in
micropipette) to NRT cells. The effectiveness of these antagonists in blocking
GABAA and GABAB receptors was examined by testing the effects of application of
GABA on the recorded cell. In normal cells application of GABA resulted in a
hyperpolarization and a marked increase in membrane conductance (Fig. 4A b).
Eliciting this response at different membrane potentials revealed a reversal
potential of around -74 mV (Fig. 4A c; n = 3). Bath application of picrotoxin

NRT RHYTHMIC BURST FIRING

677

resulted in a shift in the GABA response reversai potential to -85 mV (Fig. 4Bc)
and a marked reduction of the increase in membrane conductance (Fig. 4Bb), and
had no effect on the rhythmic burst of action potentials generated in this cell (cf.
A

|~~~~~~~1
nAB

,

^
WE

h A

A

Af

a.

A

-97 mV

97II

~~~I'~L~~~J

'+

-120

AIGABA
-100
-80
V (mV)

-60

20 mV
200 ms

Fig. 5. Reversal potential of the burst after-hyperpolarization. A, injection of a
hyperpolarizing current pulse results in a rhythmic sequence of two low threshold Ca2"
spikes separated by an after-hyperpolarization. The reversal potential of the afterhyperpolarization was examined by injecting a hyperpolarizing current pulse at the peak
of the after-hyperpolarization and comparing the resulting deviation in membrane
potential with that obtained by injection of the same current pulse during the lack of an
after-hyperpolarization. In this cell, the AHP (arrows) reversed from hyperpolarizing (top
two traces) to depolarizing (bottom traces) at about -97 mV (third set of traces from top).
B, plot of the group data reveals an average reversal potential of -94 mV. The reversal
potential for short latency responses to GABA (-75 mV) is shown for comparison.

Fig. 4A a and Ba). Similarly, cells obtained in the presence of picrotoxin responded
with normal sequences of rhythmic burst firing to the injection of a hyperpolarizing
current pulse (Fig. 4Ca; n = 7). Local application of the GABAB antagonist 2hydroxy-saclofen blocked the residual response of these cells to GABA (Fig. 5Cb
and Db; n = 2) but did not disrupt the rhythmic burst firing (cf. Fig. 4Ca and Da).
These results indicate that activation of GABAA and GABAB receptors do not
contribute critically to the rhythmic burst firing recorded in the present
experimental situation.

Ionic basis of burst after-hyperpolarization
Previous investigations of after-burst hyperpolarizations in thalamic neurones
have revealed that there are at least two prominent mechanisms for their
generation: activation of a Ca2"-activated K+ current (McCormick & Prince, 1988)
or deactivation and activation of a hyperpolarization-activated cation current

678

T. BAL AND D. A. McCORMICK

(McCormick & Pape, 1990). If the burst AHP is a Ca2"-activated K+ current, then it
should reverse to a depolarization at EK, should be associated with a conductance
increase, and should be blocked by blockers of K+ currents (e.g. internal Cs+,
external tetraethylammonium or apamin) (see Rudy, 1988; Castle, Haylett &
Jenkinson, 1989).
Intracellular injection of a short duration (10-20 ms) hyperpolarizing current
pulse at the peak of the AHP revealed that this after-hyperpolarization is
associated with an increase in apparent membrane conductance, suggesting that it
is mediated by the opening of some type of ionic channels (not shown).
Examination of the reversal potential of the low threshold Ca2" spike AHP
revealed that it reversed to an after-depolarization at an average membrane
potential of -95 mV (± 2; n = 5; Fig. 5), which is close to the equilibrium potential
for K+ in 2-5 mm [K+]. (McCormick & Prince, 1986), suggesting that the increase in
membrane conductance is largely specific for K+ ions. The occurrence of this K+
conductance following a low threshold Ca2" spike suggests that it may be Ca2+
activated. Indeed, increasing the buffering of [Ca2+], by including the Ca2+ chelating
agent ethyleneglycol-bis-(fl-aminoethyl ether)N,N,N7,N7-tetraacetic acid (EGTA) in
the recording micropipette resulted in the disappearance of the burst AHP and the
appearance of a pronounced slow after-depolarization (Fig. 6A; n = 20). Block of
fast action potentials with tetrodotoxin revealed a large slow after-depolarization
underlying this event (not shown).
Further evidence that a Ca2+-activated K+ current underlies the generation of
the burst-AHP was obtained by examining the effects of intracellular injection of
the K+ channel blocking agent Cs+, bath application of either tetraethylammonium
(TEA) or the bee venom toxin apamin. Intracellular recording of NRT neurones
with caesium acetate microelectrodes resulted in the disappearance of after-burst
hyperpolarizations and their replacement with a prolonged after-depolarization
(Fig. 6B; n = 4; within-cell comparison). Application of tetrodotoxin (10 /M)
blocked Na+-dependent action potential generation but not the slow afterdepolarization, indicating that this event is intrinsic to NRT cells (Fig. 6B).
Similarly, bath application of TEA (5-20 mM; n = 3) after the block of action
potentials with tetrodotoxin also resulted in the slowing of the falling phase of the
low threshold Caa2+ spike, a reduction in the membrane potential reached by the
after-hyperpolarization, and the appearance of a large slow after-depolarization in
single cells (Fig. 6C). However, even in the presence of 10 mm TEA, each low
threshold Ca2+ spike was associated with a small after-hyperpolarization (Fig. 6C,
TEA). Removal of TEA from the bathing medium reinstated the normal low
threshold Ca2+ spike and after-hyperpolarization (Fig. 6C, wash).
Apamin is reported to block potently a particular subtype of Ca2+-activated K+
current and the underlying channels (reviewed in Castle et al. 1989). Local
application of apamin (100 nm in micropipette; n = 19) resulted in a complete
abolition of the Ca2+ spike after-hyperpolarization and resulted in the appearance of
a prolonged after-depolarization (Fig. 6D). These effects of apamin were practically
irreversible and prolonged (hours) washing with normal solution failed to reinstate
the after-hyperpolarization, as reported previously (Avanzini et al. 1989).
These results indicate that the after-hyperpolarization occurring following the

NRT RHYTHMIC BURST FIRING

679

Control

EGTA

Overlay

Cs' early

Cs' late

Cs'

Control

TEA

Wash

Control

Apamin
Late

Overlay

A

D

+

TTX

Early
20 mV
250 ms

Fig. 6. Pharmacological properties of the burst after-hyperpolarization. A, buffering of
intracellular Ca2` blocks the burst after-hyperpolarization. Recording of cells with
microelectrodes which contain a high concentration of EGTA (04 M EGTA +1 M
potassium acetate) results in an abolition of the burst after-hyperpolarization, a dramatic
increase in action potential discharge rate during the burst, and the appearance of a tonic
tail of activity (pre-pulse membrane potential (Vm) = -63 mV). B, recording NRT
neurones with microelectrodes filled with 4 M caesium acetate results in an abolition of the
burst after-hyperpolarization and the appearance of a large and prolonged afterdepolarization (Vm = -65 mV). Local application of TTX (10 /M) abolishes the action
potentials and reveals the underlying slow after-depolarization. C, bath application of
tetraethylammonium (TEA; 10 mm) results in the appearance of a large slow afterdepolarization, and the reduction of the negative value of the membrane potential
obtained after the low threshold Ca2` spike, although a burst after-hyperpolarization is
still evident. These effects are reversible upon removal of TEA (wash; Vm = -68 mV). D,
local application of apamin (100 nm in micropipette) results in a complete block of the
after-hyperpolarization and the appearance of the slow after-depolarization
(Vm = -63 mV). Action potentials blocked in C and D with local application of
tetrodotoxin. Cells in A,B, C and D are from different experiments.

generation of a Ca2` spike represents a Ca2+-activated K+ current. The
hyperpolarization-activated (h)-current (McCormick & Pape, 1990) does not appear
to make a critical contribution in NRT cells, since complete block of this current
with local or bath application of Cs+ (2 mm in bath; 20 mm in micropipette; n = 4)
did not alter or block rhythmic burst firing (not shown).

680

T. BAL AND D. A. McCORMICK

Ionic basis of the after-depolarization
The ionic mechanisms involved in the generation of the after-depolarization
which occurs after block of Ca2+-activated K+ currents was investigated in
neurones after the block of voltage-dependent Na+ currents with local applications
A

Control

Choline chloride

Wash

B

Control

NMDG

Wash

J20 mV
250 ms

Fig. 7. Ionic basis of the slow after-depolarization. A, substitution of choline chloride for
NaCl and choline bicarbonate for sodium bicarbonate in the bathing medium has little
effect on the slow after-depolarization (prepulse Vm = -63 mV). B, in contrast,
substitution of N-methyl-D-glucamine chloride for NaCl results in a selective block of the
slow ADP (Vm = -60 mV). This effect is reversible. Two controls are shown in B. The
continuous trace is a voltage pulse which matches that in NMDG, while the dotted line is
one which matches that obtained during wash. Data obtained after application of
tetrodotoxin (10 uM in micropipette) and apamin (100 nm in micropipette) to facilitate the
study of the ADP. Data for A and B obtained from two seperate cells.

of tetrodotoxin (10 AM) and the Ca2"-activated K+ current with apamin (100 nm in
micropipette). Under these circumstances, injection of hyperpolarizing current
pulses were followed by a slow after-depolarization, as reported above (Figs 7 and
8). The possibility that this slow after-depolarization may be generated by a
calcium-activated non-selective cation current (CAN-current; Partridge &
Swandulla, 1988) was investigated with ion substitution experiments.
Substitution of choline chloride for NaCl and choline bicarbonate for sodium
bicarbonate in equimolar concentrations in the bathing medium resulted in little
effect on the slow after-depolarization (Fig. 7A; n = 6), while substituting Nmethyl-D-glucamine chloride for NaCl resulted in an abolition of the slow ADP
while leaving the low threshold Ca2" spike intact (Fig. 7B; n = 6). Replacement of
CaCl2 in the bathing medium with BaCl2 resulted in a marked enhancement of the
low threshold Ca21 spike, presumably owing to the block of K+ currents and
increased mobility of Ba21 through T-channels (see Kostyuk, 1989), but did not
block the slow ADP (Fig. 8A; n = 3). In contrast, replacement of CaCl2 with SrCl2
also resulted in an enhancement of the low threshold Ca21 spike, but in association
with a complete block of the slow ADP (Fig. 8B; n = 4).

NRT RHYTHMIC BURST FIRING

681

In the experiment illustrated in Fig. 8C, CaCl2 was replaced with BaCl2, resulting
in an enhancement of the low threshold Ca21 spike and without block of the slow
ADP. Replacement of BaCl2 with MgCl2 resulted initially in a reduction of the
amplitude and rate of rise of the low threshold Ca21 spike, and a complete block of
the slow ADP. Further washing-in of the MgCl2 resulted in a complete block of both
A

Control

Ba2+

Overlay

B

Control

Sr2+

Overlay
20 mV

C a
Ca2+ -

b

Cnrols

250 ms

Mg2l early

Mg2t late

Ba2
Wash Ba2+

L.ate

Early

Wash Ca2+

20 mV

250 ms
Fig. 8. Ionic mechanisms involved in activation of the slow ADP. A, replacement of CaCl2
with BaCl2 results in an increase in apparent input resistance (compensated for by
reduction of the amplitude of the current pulse), an increase in the membrane time
constant, an increase in the low threshold Ca2" spike, and did not abolish the slow ADP
(pre-pulse Vm= -67 mV). B, in contrast, replacement of CaCl2 with SrCl2 results in a
complete abolition of the slow ADP and an enhancement of the low threshold Ca21 spike
(Vm = -65 mV). Ca, replacement of CaCl2 with BaCl2 again does not abolish the slow ADP,
although replacement of BaCl2 with MgCI2 does abolish the slow ADP, followed by an
abolition of the low threshold Ca21 spike. These effects are reversible (Cb; Vm = -72 mV).
Data obtained after application of tetrodotoxin (10 /SM in micropipette) and apamin
(100 nM in micropipette).

the low threshold Ca2" spike and the slow ADP (n = 3). These effects of Mg2' and
Ba21 were reversible (Fig. 8Cb).
Together these results suggest that the slow ADP is mediated by a Ca2+-activated

non-selective cation current which is able to be carried by both Na+ and choline+ but
not by N-methyl-D-glucamine' and which can be activated by both Ca2' and Ba21
but not by Sr21 or Mg2+.

Ionic basis of tonic firing in NRT cells
Extracellular recordings of NRT cells revealed that application of 5-HT (500 /SM
in micropipette), noradrenaline (NA) (500 /M in micropipette) or IS,3R-1aminocyclopentane-1,3-dicarboxylic acid (ACPD; 500 uM in micropipette) resulted
in marked excitation and the generation of tonic firing, as reported previously
(McCormick & Wang, 1991). Interestingly, repeated application of any of these
three substances resulted in a maximal firing frequency which, after being obtained,

T. BAL AND D. A. McCORMICK

682

could not be exceeded by additional application of the same agonist (e.g. Fig. 9D).
This 'ceiling effect' was not due, however, to an inability of the cell to discharge
tonically at higher frequencies, since additional applications of glutamate resulted
in large increases in spike frequency (Fig. 9D). At 35 °C, the maximal frequency of
firing which could be brought about by NA was 20-30 Hz (n = 3), while at 38 °C it
60 Hz
~~~~~~~~~~~30

A

_tt

ttT

NA

5-HTNA

t

NA

NA 60 s

B

:50 Hz
O

I

t

NA 5-HT
_
_

5-HT
C
i

APOD

60 s

5-HT
i

350 Hz

_ - 10~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ -

ACPD

5-HT ACPD

60 s

:160 Hz

D

i120
j80
|

ACPD

_

Glu

-40

|~~~~~
tttittittt

JO

60 s

Glu

1 s

Fig. 9. Frequency limitation and non-additivity of tonic firing responses to NA, 5-HT
and ACPD. A, application of NA (500 FM in micropipette) results in an increase in single
spike discharge to approximately 40 Hz. Maximal application of 5-HT (500wM in
micropipette) results in a tonic discharge which becomes steady around 70 Hz.
Application of NA at this point has no additional effect, indicating occlusion. As the
response to 5-HT recovers, the response to NA reappears. B, in contrast, maximal
application of NA, although reducing the response to 5-HT, does not completely occlude
it. C, application of the glutamate metabotropic agonist ACPD (500 FM in micropipette)
results in a peak increase in firing rate of approximately 50 Hz. Application of 5-HT and
ACPD together result in a similar increase in firing rate. D, maximal application of
ACPD results in a firing rate of approximately 50 Hz, which is not the maximal firing
rate capable of being generated by the cell, since application of glutamate results in large
increases in firing rate up to 160 Hz (original recording shown at right for detail).
Guinea-pig NRT cell recorded at 38 'C.

was 35-40 Hz (n = 3). In contrast, both 5-HT (n = 24) and ACPD (n = 11) resulted
in higher maximal firing frequencies of 40-70 Hz at 38 'C. The possibility that
these agents may occlude one another owing to convergence of postsynaptic effector
mechanisms was tested by examining the effects of maximal activation of one
response on the others. Maximal activation of the serotonin response was found to
block the response to NA and ACPD (Fig. 9A and C) while maximal activation of
the NA response strongly reduced, but did not completely block the response to
either 5-HT or ACPD (Fig. 9B). The possibility that a persistent Na+ current may

NRT RHYTHMIC BURST FIRING

683

contribute to the 5-HT-induced tonic depolarization was tested through the local
application of tetrodotoxin (10 ,UM in micropipette). Local application of
tetrodotoxin resulted in a cessation of action potential generation followed by a
5-6 mV hyperpolarization of the membrane potential (Fig. 10), presumably
resulting from block of the persistent Na+ current. Interestingly, during the

A

a

~
5-HT

b_w

3

~

5-HT

40 Hz

j200

TTX

4IEWphI|
___

~

5 mV

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1

0 s

20 s
B

>

5 mV

200 ms

Fig. 10. Intracellular phenomena associated with the serotonin-induced tonic firing. A a
and A b, application of a maximal does of 5-HT results in depolarization of the membrane
potential (Aa), an increase in membrane oscillation (not shown), and tonic firing which
remains steady at approximately 45 Hz (A b; Vm prior to 5-HT = -58 mV). Block of
voltage-dependent Na+ channels with local application of tetrodotoxin (10 FM in
micropipette) results in abolition of action potentials, followed by abolition of rhythmic
oscillations (shown in B for detail) and hyperpolarization of the membrane potential.

application of tetrodotoxin, oscillations in the membrane potential were revealed
(Fig. lOB). Similar oscillations in the membrane potential were also observed in
normal cells during hyperpolarization below firing threshold (not shown). The
eventual block of these oscillations by tetrodotoxin (Fig. lOB, right trace) indicates
that they probably originate from a mixture of intrinisic membrane events and
synaptic potentials, although this requires further investigation.
Application of the inhibitory amino acid GABA during tonic discharge induced
by 5-HT or NA could reduce the firing frequency or inhibit all single spike activity
(not shown). Cessation of the GABA application rapidly reinstated tonic discharge
back to the original firing rate, while reinstatement of the GABA application again
silenced neuronal activity (not shown). In this manner, application of GABA could
'sculpt' the firing rate of NRT cells with the maximal baseline firing rate being
around 30-60 Hz.

Pinault & Deschenes (1992a) have recently suggested that NRT cells may have
an intrinsic propensity to fire at 30-60 Hz. However, in vitro, NRT cells respond to
5-HT, NA, and ACPD with a steady increase in firing rate covering all frequencies
between approximately 5 and 60 Hz (Fig. 9). To examine the possible tendency to

684

T. BAL AND D. A. McCORMICK

discharge at particular frequencies, we injected prolonged depolarizing current
pulses (0-5-2 s) of varying amplitude into NRT cells and formed frequency versus
current and frequency versus time plots (Fig. 11). Intracellular injection of constant
current pulses into NRT cells were found to result in the generation of sustained
A

B
N
I

400

1 ~~~~~

o; 300

ts1 nA

20
na 200

0r
-

VONVOW vvv

A

0.065
0 280

100

M

\- 0170

-

<:

60

1111~VVIV~A-0*095

0
C

40

N

'0~-1 45

JZ;N ~~0-095

20 | a

i

cc

0

0*045

0

10 mV
100 ms
700
600
500
C 400
:E 300
cc 200
100

0 065

200 400
Time (ms)

600

_120

N

N

_

I

I

0,

D

0 ~~~0135

0}
a,
0:

80

_
40-

a)
CL<_
<

3
Current injection (nA)
1

2

O _

0

0.1 02
03 0-4
Current injection (nA)

Fig. 11. Frequency versus current firing properties of NRT cells. A, examples of the
response of a NRT cell to the intracellular injection of prolonged depolarizing current
pulses of different magnitudes (Vm = -56 mV). B, frequency of firing versus time plots for
frequency ranges of 0-400 and 0-70 Hz. Action potential discharge is associated with a
slowing of firing in the first two interspike intervals followed by highly regular and
maintained activity. C, plot of frequency versus current for the first interspike interval for
five different cells reveal relatively linear relationships and the ability to fire at frequencies
up to 500-700 Hz. D, detailed examination of the frequency versus current response curve
at frequencies below 100 Hz for two cells reveals a threshold of approximately 10 Hz and
no clear tendency to fire at any particular frequency.

trains of action potentials in which the frequency of firing slowed down over the
first few interspike intervals to a steady state (Fig. 11A and B). Examination of the
frequency versus current injected (f-I) plot for either the first interspike interval
(Fig. tIC and D; n =8) or for steady state (not shown) did not reveal any
particular frequency between 10 and 400 Hz which was preferred by the NRT cells.
Thus, small increases in the amount of injected current resulted in increases in
firing rate in a linear manner, without the non-linearities predicted if these cells
'preferred' particular frequencies of activity (Fig. lID).

NRT RHYTHMIC BURST FIRING

685

DISCUSSION

The nucleus reticularis of the thalamus appears to be the 'pacemaker' of certain
forms of slow oscillation in the thalamus, particularly spindle waves (reviewed in
Steriade & Deschenes, 1984). Spindle waves are 1-3 s periods of 7-14 Hz oscillation
which occur during light slow wave sleep with a marked periodicity of once every
5-10 s. Our results indicate that NRT neurones possess the ionic currents necessary
to generate intrinsic rhythmic sequences or high frequency burst discharges in the
frequency range of spindle waves (7-12 Hz) at body temperature. This sequence of
oscillations appears to be mediated in large part through the activation of a low
threshold Ca2" spike, which generates a high frequency burst of Na+- and K+dependent action potentials, followed by an after-hyperpolarization mediated by
an apamin-sensitive Ca2"-activated K+ current (Fig. 12; see also Avanzini et al.
1989). This rhythmic burst firing may occur for two to eight cycles, presumably
depending upon the amplitude of the Ca2"-activated K+ current and its interaction
with the T-current (IT). The intrinsic ability of NET cells to generate rhythmic
burst discharges may allow these cells to make a critical contribution to the
generation of spindle waves in the thalamus. However, intracellular recordings
from NRT cells in vivo during spontaneous spindle wave generation, or during
rhythmic oscillation induced by single shock stimulation of cortical or thalamic
inputs, reveal a significant contribution of excitatory synaptic potentials to the
action potential discharge patterns of NRT cells (Mulle et al. 1986; Shosaku et al.
1989). Strong hyperpolarization of NRT cells during these events indicate that a
barrage of EPSPs, presumably resulting from a burst of action potentials in one or
more relay cells, results in the activation of additional depolarizing currents in
NRT cells, such as IT, and a subsequent burst discharge. We are then left with the
question of whether spindle oscillations are generated as an intrinsic property of
NRT cells or as synaptic events generated through their interaction with thalamic
relay cells. Since surgical isolation of the NRT from the rest of the thalamus is
reported to leave the NRT with the ability to generate spindle-like oscillations
(Steriade et al. 1987a) and EPSPs of presumed thalamic origin occur in NET cells
during each cycle of the spindle wave, it would appear that both processes are
involved. We propose the following scenario as one possible mechanism of spindle
wave generation. The coincident burst firing of some critical number of NRT cells,
either intrinsically or in response to cortical or thalamic input, results in the
hyperpolarization of both these NRT cells (through a Ca2+-activated K+ current)
and an anatomically connected population of relay cells (through GABAergic
inhibition). As these periods of hyperpolarization lessen, the NRT cells, and a
subset of relay cells, will generate an intrinsic burst of action potentials through the
activation of IT (see Andersen & Andersson, 1968; Steriade & Deschenes, 1984).
Which cells will generate these bursts first will depend upon the kinetics and depth
of the Ca2+-activated K+ current in the NRT cells and the inhibitory postsynaptic
potential in the relay cells. If one or more of the relay cells which are inhibited
bursts before the NRT cell, then the NRT cell will be depolarized by a barrage of
one to five EPSPs arriving at 250-400 Hz depending on the number of spikes in the
relay cell burst and the convergence of bursting relay cells to the NRT neurone.

686

T. BAL AND D. A. McoORMICK

This barrage of EPSPs will in turn activate the low threshold Ca2" current in the
NRT, the amount of which is available being determined by the duration and depth
of after-hyperpolarization occurring after the last burst discharge. The activation
ofIT will further enhance the depolarization resulting from the EPSPs, and result
in a burst of action potentials in the NRT cells, which will begin the cycle again by
hyperpolarizing the relay cells. Alternatively, the NRT cells may burst intrinsically
before the arrival of thalamic EPSPs. In this circumstance the synaptic potentials
will then facilitate the low threshold Ca2" spike in the generation of action potentials
and the occurrence of the two together will determine the depth and duration of
the subsequent after-hyperpolarization in the NRT cell and the depth and duration
of the inhibition of the connected relay cells. Together, both of these processes will
subsequently determine the frequency and strength of oscillation.
If none of the relay cells contacting a particular NRT cell fire during one phase of
the spindle wave, then the NRT cell may still generate a rebound burst of action
potentials at approximately the correct interval, owing to the activation of the low
threshold Ca2" spike by the relaxation of the after-hyperpolarization. In this
manner, the ability ofNRT cells to generate rhythmic burst dischargesallowsfora
'safety mechanism' in which the rhythmic oscillation may continue even in the
lack of rebound response from thalamic relay cells. Thus, we view the rhythmic
firing of NRT cells during the generation of spindle waves as a mixture of intrinsic
oscillatory properties and circuitous interactions between these cells and their
anatomically connected relay cells. Both of these mechanisms of oscillation appear
to have a similar resonant frequency (7-14 Hz), ensuring that even failure of the
relay component of the oscillation will leave intact an oscillation in the NRT cell of
a similar amplitude and time course.
Spindle waves in naturally sleeping cats, in contrast to those recorded in
barbiturate-anaesthetized animals, are associated with the appearance of a
prolonged tonic 'tail' of action potential activity in NET cells after each sequence of
rhythmic burst firing (Domich, Oakson & Steriade, 1986). In the present study we
have shown that NET cells are capable of generating a tonic tail of single spike
activity after the generation of rhythmic low threshold Ca21 spikes and that this
tonic tail may be mediated by a slow after-depolarization, which itself may be
generated through a Ca2+-activated non-selective cation (CAN) current. Calciumactivated non-selective cation currents have been reported in some invertebrate
neurones that are known to generate intrinsic and periodic bursts of action
potentials (reviewed in Partridge & Swandulla, 1988). We propose that in NRT
cells, the rhythmic occurrence of low threshold Ca21 spikes and their associated
bursts of fast action potentials results in increases in [Ca21]i which not only triggers
a Ca2+-activated K+ current, but may also gradually activate ICAN. As this cation
current is activated, it depolarizes the cell towards single spike firing threshold and
counteracts the hyperpolarizing influence of the Ca2+-activated K+ current. The
loss of the postburst AHP results in a decrease in removal of inactivation of IT,
thereby resulting in an eventual failure of rebound low threshold Ca2+ spikes.
Subsequently, the slow after-depolarization dominates the membrane potential
and the cell discharges in a tonic manner.

NRT RHYTHMIC BURST FIRING

687

Origin of tonic activity in NRT cells
Awakening from sleep is associated with an abolition of rhythmic burst firing in
the NRT and the appearance of tonic, single spike activity, presumably through
tonic depolarization of the membrane potential of NRT cells (e.g. Hirsch,
A a

/Na/K /Ca
\'/T

J JA

B

a

/VVVVAA)i

III

k

K/l,

CAN

-jmv
200 ms 5-HT

'Rhythmic
bursts

b

5-HT => I/K,L

otenal

'K

/K,Ca .

'Nqa

200 ms

b

INA

Acti

-

ACPD

1

20mv

200 ms

30-60 Hz firing

/K

t/Na,p

Action
c

Ptentials

/NCa

/CAN
'CAN

Tonic firing

Fig. 12. Idealized scheme of the ionic basis of rhythmic burst and tonic firing in NRT cells.
Removal of a hyperpolarizing current pulse results in a low threshold Ca2" spike, which
activates a high frequency burst of action potentials mediated by the transient Na+
current INa and various K+ currents, collectively referred to as IK. In addition, the fast
Na+ spikes also are likely to activate high threshold Ca2" currents, here referred to as Ic.
The entry of Ca2" results in the activation of Ca2"-activated K+ current (IK,c) and
therefore an after-hyperpolarization. The depth and duration of this afterhyperpolarization determines the amplitude of the subsequent low threshold Ca2+ spike,
which is activated by the relaxation of the after-hyperpolarization. In addition to
activating a Ca2+-activated K+ current, the entry of Ca2+ into the cell is also proposed to
activate a Ca2+-activated non-selective cation current (ICAN) which results in a slow afterdepolarization and the generation of tonic discharge at the end of the oscillatory burst
firing (A a and A b). Activation of serotoninergic, noradrenergic or glutamate metabotropic
receptors results in a tonic depolarization of the cell, in part through the reduction of a
resting 'leak' potassium conductance IKL which results in single spike activity in the
frequency range of 30-60 Hz. The frequency of this tonic activity is proposed to be
determined in large part by the interaction of the persistent Na+ current (INa p) and the
currents involved in action potential generation (Ba and Bb).

Fourment & Marc, 1983; Steriade et al. 1986; see Steriade, Jones & Llinas, 1990). Of
the numerous systems innervating the NRT, the cortical and thalamic inputs are
known to exert an excitatory influence through excitatory amino acid receptors (de
Curtis et al. 1989), the noradrenergic and serotoninergic inputs may tonically
depolarize NRT cells through block of a K+ current through activation of a, and
5-HT2 receptors (Kayama, Negi, Sugitani & Iwama, 1982; McCormick & Wang,
1991), the cholinergic inputs may inhibit single spike activity through an increase
in K+ conductance through M2 receptors (McCormick & Prince, 1986), and the

688

T. BAL AND D. A. McCORMICK

GABAergic inputs may inhibit neuronal activity through GABAA and GABAB
receptors (Fig. 5). Therefore, the depolarization of NRT cells that is associated with
the transition from the sleeping to the waking and attentive state would represent
a balance of all of these influences (and probably others) and the intrinsic properties
of NRT cells. Here we have shown that maximal activation of serotoninergic,
noradrenergic, or glutamate metabotropic receptors on NRT cells in the absence of
other transmitter actions results in the depolarization of these cells, increased
activation of a persistent Na+ current and the generation of 30-60 Hz tonic firing.
This tonic firing may then be 'gated' on and off through the activation of
GABAergic receptors. Similarly, Pinault & Deschenes (1992a,b) have recently
described the presence of 'clock-like' firing of NRT neurones at frequencies between
25 and 60 Hz (centred around 40 Hz) in urethane anaesthetized rats. This activity
is critically dependent upon noradrenergic influences, since lesions of the locus
coeruleus or application of a, antagonists silences the tonically firing NRT cells.
However, in addition, cooling of the cerebral cortex reduced the frequency of tonic
activity while reduction of GABAergic transmission with the GABAA antagonist
bicuculline or muscarinic transmission with scopolamine increases the rate of action
potential discharge, indicating that this activity is under the influence of a number
of convergent systems (Pinault & Deschenes, 1992 a, b).
In summary, we suggest that NRT cells generate action potentials in three basic
modes: at hyperpolarized membrane potentials, NRT cells may generate rhythmic
bursts at relatively slow frequencies (e.g. 0-5-7 Hz; Fig. 3); at slightly more
depolarized levels, NRT cells oscillate at higher frequencies (7-14 Hz) and generate
rhythmic burst sequences followed by tonic single spike activity (Figs 3 and 12);
while at still more depolarized levels, activity is dominated by the occurrence of
highly regular, tonic activity (Fig. 12), the frequency of which is determined by the
mixture of intrinsic ionic currents and convergence of neurotransmitter actions.
The presence of these three different modes of action potential generation may
allow NRT neurones to participate actively in the generation of the basic
oscillatory rhythms seen in the forebrain: delta waves (0 5-4 Hz) during deep slowwave sleep; spindle waves (7-14 Hz) during light slow-wave sleep; and gamma
waves (30-60 Hz) during awake and attentive behaviour. Which of these different
modes of activity is generated is determined through a co-ordinated modulation of
thalamocortical systems by the ionic and cellular actions of the ascending and
descending neurotransmitter systems, such that during periods of deep slow wave
sleep the lack of activity in ascending noradrenergic, serotoninergic and cholinergic
systems allows NRT, thalamic relay, and some cortical neurones to relax into the
generation of slow (0 5-4 Hz) rhythmic burst firing (see also Steriade, Curro Dossi &
Nunez, 1991), while small increases in activity in these ascending systems may
depolarize NRT and thalamic relay cells into the 'spindle-oscillation' mode of light,
synchronized electroencephalogram sleep. Further increases in activity in these
ascending systems may induce a state of readiness in thalamocortical networks
which includes the increased propensity for the transmission and processing of
sensory information and the generation of 40 Hz oscillations (Steriade & McCarley,
1990 for review; McCormick, 1992). During these various changes in state of

NRT RHYTHMIC BURST FIRING

689

activity in thalamocortical networks, we, and others (Crick, 1984; Steriade &
Deschenes, 1984; Steriade & Llinas, 1988; Asanuma, 1989; Pinault & Deschenes,
1992a,b) envision the properties and connectivity of the NRT as ideal for the
coordination of correlated activity in the forebrain; a hypothesis which requires
detailed investigation.
Note added in proof. We have recently reported the occurrence of spindle waves in slices of Ferret
LGNd and perigeniculate nucleus maintained in vitro (M. von Krosigt, T. Bal and D.A.
McCormick, 1993. (Science, in the Press)). Perigeniculate neurons generate rhythmic bursts of
low threshold Ca2" spikes during these oscillations in similarity with those reported here although
they are often activated by excitatory postsynaptic potentials arriving from the LGNd.

We thank Marcus von Krosigk and Zhong Wang for valuable comments on this manuscript.
This research was supported by the National Institute of Health, the Klingenstein Fund and the
Sloan Foundation.
REFERENCES

ANDERSEN, P. & ANDERSSON, S. A. (1968). Physiological Basis of the Alpha Rhythm. AppletonCentury-Crofts, New York.
ASANUMA, C. (1989). Axonal arborizations of a magnocellular basal nucleus input and their relation
to the neurons in the thalamic reticular nucleus of rats. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA 86, 4746-4750.
ASANUMA, C. (1992). Noradrenergic innervation of the thalamic reticular nucleus: A light and
electron microscopic immunohistochemical study in rats. Journal of Comparative Neurology 319,
299-311.
ASANUMA, C. & PORTER, L.L. (1990) Light and electron microscopic evidence for a GABAergic
projection from the caudal basal forebrain to the thalamic reticular nucleus in rats. Journal of
Comparative Neurology 302, 159-172.
AVANZINI, G., DE CURTIS, M., PANZICA, F. & SPREAFICO, R. (1989). Intrinsic properties of nucleus
reticularis thalami neurones of the rat studied in vitro. Journal of Physiology 416, 111-122.
BuzSAKI, G., BICKFORD, R. G., PONOMAREFF, G., THAL, L. J., MANDEL, R. & GAGE, F. H. (1988).
Nucleus basalis and thalamic control of neocortical activity in the freely moving rat. Journal of
Neuroscience 8, 4007-4026.
CASTLE, N. A., HAYLETT, D. G. & JENKINSON, D. H. (1989). Toxins in the characterization of
potassium channels. Trends in Neurosciences 12, 59-65.
CRICK, F. (1984). Function of the thalamic reticular complex: The searchlight hypothesis.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 81, 4586-4590.
DE CURTIS, M., SPREAFICO, R. & AVANZINI, G. (1989). Excitatory amino acids mediate responses
elicited in vitro by stimulation of cortical afferents to reticularis thalami neurons of the rat.
Neuroscience 33, 275-283.
DESCHENES, M., MADARIAGA-DoMICH, A. & STERIADE, M. (1985). Dendrodendritic synapses in cat
reticularis thalami nucleus: a structural basis for thalamic spindle synchronization. Brain
Research 334, 169-171.
DoMICH, L., OAKSON, G. & STERIADE, M. (1986). Thalamic burst patterns in the naturally sleeping
cat: A comparison between cortically projecting and reticularis neurones. Journal of Physiology
379,429-449.
HALLANGER, A. E., LEVEY, A. I., LEE, H. J., RYE, D. B. & WAINER, B. H. (1987). The origins of
cholinergic and other subcortical afferents to the thalamus in the rat. Journal of Comparative
Neurology 262, 105-124.
HARRIS, R. M. (1987). Axon collaterals in the thalamic reticular nucleus from thalamocortical
neurons in the rat ventrobasal thalamus. Journal of Comparative Neurology 258, 397-406.
HAZRATI, L.-N. & PARENT, A. (1991). Projection from the external pallidum to the reticular
thalamic nucleus in the squirrel monkey. Brain Research 550, 142-146.

690

T. BAL AND D. A. McCORMICK

HIRSCH, J. C., FOURMENT, A. & MARC, M. E. (1983). Sleep-related variations of membrane potential
in the lateral geniculate body relay neurons of the cat. Brain Research 259, 308-312.
HOUSER, C. R., VAUGHN, J. E., BARBER, R. P. & ROBERTS, E. (1980). GABA neurons are the major
cell type of the nucleus reticularis thalami. Brain Research 200, 341-354.
HUGUENARD, J. R. & PRINCE, D. A. (1992). A novel T-type current underlies prolonged Ca2`dependent burst firing in GABAergic neurons of the rat thalamic reticular nucleus. Journal of
Neuroscience 12, 3804-3817.
JONES, E. G. (1985). The Thalamus. Plenum Press, New York.
KAYAMA, Y., NEGI, T., SUGITANI, M. & IWAMA, K. (1982). Effects of locus coeruleus stimulation on
neuronal activities of dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus and perigeniculate reticular nucleus of the
rat. Neuroscience 7, 655-666.
KOSTYUK, P. G. (1989). Diversity of calcium ion channels in cellular membranes. Neuroscience 28,
253-261.
LAVOIE, B. & PARENT, A. (1991). Serotoninergic innervation of the thalamus in primate: An
immunohistochemical study. Journal of Comparative Neurology 312, 1-18.
LEVEY, A. I., HALLANGER, A. E. & WAINER, B. H. (1987 a). Cholinergic nucleus basalis neurons may
influence the cortex via the thalamus. Neuroscience Letters 10, 7-13.
MCCORMICK, D. A. (1992). Neurotransmitter actions in the thalamus and cerebral cortex and their
role in neuromodulation of thalamocortical activity. Progress in Neurobiology 39, 337-388
MCCORMICK, D. A. & PAPE, H.-C. (1990). Properties of a hyperpolarization-activated cation current
and its role in rhythmic oscillation in thalamic relay neurons. Journal of Physiology 431, 291-318.
MCCORMICK, D. A. & PRINCE, D. A. (1986). Acetylcholine induces burst firing in thalamic reticular
neurones by activating a potassium conductance. Nature 319, 402-405.
MCCORMICK, D. A. & PRINCE, D. A. (1988). Noradrenergic modulation of firing pattern in guinea pig
and cat thalamic neurons, in vitro. Journal of Neurophysiology 59, 978-996.
MCCORMICK, D. A. & WANG, Z. (1991). Serotonin and noradrenaline excite GABAergic neurones of
the guinea-pig and cat nucleus reticularis thalami. Journal of Physiology 442, 235-255.
MARCZYNSKI, T. J., BURNS, L. L., LIVEZEY, G. T., VIMAL, R. L. P. & CHEN, E. (1984). Sleep and
purposive behavior: Inverse deviations from randomness of neuronal firing patterns in the feline
thalamus. A new form of homeostasis? Brain Research 298, 75-90.
MUKRAMETOV, L. M., RIZZOLATrI, G. & SEITUN, A. (1970). An analysis of the spontaneous activity
of lateral geniculate neurons and of optic tract fibers in freely moving cats. Archives Italiennes de
Biologie 108, 325-347.
MUKHAMETOV, L. M., RIZZOLATTI, G. & TRADARDI, V. (1970). Spontaneous activity of neurones of
nucleus reticularis thalami in freely moving cats. Journal of Physiology 210, 651-667.
MULLE, C., MADARIAGA, A. & DESCHE'NES, M. (1986). Morphology and electrophysiological
properties of reticularis thalami neurons in cat: in vivo study of a thalamic pacemaker. Journal of
Neuroscience 6, 2134-2145.
OHARA, P. T. & LIEBERMAN, A. R. (1981). Thalamic reticular nucleus: anatomical evidence that
cortico-reticular axons establish monosynaptic contact with reticulo-geniculate projection cells.
Brain Research 207, 153-156.
OHARA, P. T. & LIEBERMAN, A. R. (1985). The thalamic reticular nucleus of the adult rat:
experimental anatomical studies. Journal of Neurocytology 14, 365-41 1.
PARE', D., HAZRATI, L.-N., PARENT, A. & STERIADE, M. (1990). Substantia nigra pars reticulata
projects to the reticular thalamic nucleus of the cat: a morphological and electrophysiological
study. Brain Research 535, 139-146.
PARTRIDGE, L. D. & SWANDULLA, D. (1988). Calcium-activated non-specific cation channels. Trends
in Neurosciences 11, 69-72.
PINAULT, D. & DESCHE'NES, M. (1992 a). Voltage dependent 40-Hz oscillations in rat reticular
thalamic neurons in vivo. Neuroscience 51, 245-258.
PINAULT, D. & DESCHENES, M. (1992 b). Control of 40-Hz firing of reticular thalamic cells by
neurotransmitters. Neuroscience 51, 259-268.
RUDY, B. (1988). Diversity and ubiquity of K channels. Neuroscience 25, 729-749.

NRT RHYTHMIC BURST FIRING

691

SHOSAKU, A., KAYAMA, Y., SUMITOMO, I., SUGITANI, M. & IWAMA, K. (1989). Analysis of recurrent
inhibitory circuit in rat thalamus: Neurophysiology of the thalamic reticular nucleus. Progress in
Neurobiology 32, 77-102.
STERIADE, M., CURRO DoSSi, R. & NUNEZ, A. (1991). Network modulation of a slow intrinsic
oscillation of cat thalamocortical neurons implicated in sleep delta waves: cortical potentiation
and brainstem suppression. Journal of Neuroscience 11, 3200-3217.
STERIADE, M. & DESCHENES, M. (1984). The thalamus as a neuronal oscillator. Brain Research
Reviews 8, 1-63.
STERIADE, M., DOMICI, L. & OAKSON, G. (1986). Reticularis thalami neurons revisited: Activity
changes during shifts in states of vigilance. Journal of Neuroscience 6, 68-81.
STERIADE, M., DoMICH, L. & OAKSON, G. (1987 a). The deafferented reticular thalamic nucleus
generates spindle rhythmicity. Journal of Neurophysiology 57, 260-273.
STERIADE, M., JONES, E. G. & LLINA'S, R. R. (1990). Thalamic O8cillations and Signaling. John Wiley
and Sons, New York.
STERIADE, M. & LLINA'S, R. R. (1988). The functional states of the thalamus and the associated
neuronal interplay. Physiological Reviews 68, 649-742.
STERIADE, M. & MCCARLEY, R. W. (1990). Brainstem Control of Wakefullness and Sleep. Plenum
Press, New York.
STERIADE, M., PARENT, A. & HADA, J. (1984). Thalamic projections of nucleus reticularis thalami of
cat: a study using retrograde transpprt of horseradish peroxidase and double fluorescent tracers.
Journal of Comparative Neurology 229, 531-547.
STERIADE, M., PARENT, A., PARE', D. & SMITH, Y. (1987 b). Cholinergic and non-cholinergic neurons
of cat basal forebrain project to reticular and mediodorsal thalamic nuclei. Brain Research 408,
373-376.
WILSON, J. R. & HENDRICKSON, A. E. (1988). Serotonergic axons in the monkey's lateral geniculate
nucleus. Visual Neuroscience 1, 125-133.
YEN, C. T., CONLEY, M., HENDRY, S. H. C. & JONES, E. G. (1985). The morphology of physiologically
identified GABAergic neurons in the somatic sensory part of the thalamic reticular nucleus in the
cat. Journal of Neuroscience 5, 2254-2268.

