The Journal

of Neuroscience,

October

1992,

12(10):

4088-4111

Calbindin and Parvalbumin Cells in Monkey VPL Thalamic Nucleus:
Distribution, Laminar Cortical Projections, and Relations to
Spinothalamic
Terminations
E. Rausell,a
Department

C. S. Bae,b A. Vifiuela,=

G. W. Huntley,”

of Anatomy and Neurobiology,

University

and E. G. Jones
of California at Irvine, Irvine, California 92717

The ventral posterior lateral nucleus (VPL) of the monkey
thalamus was investigated
by histochemical
staining for cytochrome oxidase (CO) activity and by immunocytochemical
staining for the calcium-binding
proteins
parvalbumin
and
28 kDa calbindin.
Anterograde
and retrograde
tracing experiments were used to correlate patterns of differential
distribution of CO activity and of parvalbumin
and calbindin cells
with the terminations
of spinothalamic
tract fibers and with
the types of cells projecting
differentially
to superficial
and
deeper layers of primary somatosensory
cortex (3).
VPL is composed
of CO-rich and CO-weak compartments.
Cells are generally
smaller in the CO-weak
compartment.
Parvalbumin-immunoreactive
cells and parvalbumin-immunoreactive
medial lemniscal fiber terminations
are confined
to the CO-rich compartment.
Calbindin-immunoreactive
cells
are found in both the CO-rich and CO-weak compartments.
The CO-weak compartment,
containing
only calbindin
cells,
forms isolated zones throughout
VPL and expands as a cap
covering the posterior surface of the ventral posterior medial
nucleus (VPM). Spinothalamic
tract terminations
tend to be
concentrated
in the CO-weak compartment,
especially in the
posterior
cap. Other CO-weak,
parvalbumin-negative,
calbindin-positive
nuclei, including
the posterior,
ventral posterior inferior, and anterior pulvinar and the small-celled
matrix of VPM are also associated
with concentrations
of
spinothalamic
and caudal trigeminothalamic
terminations.
Parvalbumin
cells are consistently
larger than calbindin
cells and are retrogradely
labeled only after injections
of
tracers in middle and deep layers of SI. The smaller calbindin
cells are the only cells retrogradely
labeled after placement
of retrograde
tracers that primarily involve layer I of SI.
The compartmental
organization
of VPL is similar to but
less rigid than that previously reported in VPM. VPL and VPM
relay cells projecting
to different layers of SI cortex can be
distinguished
by differential
immunoreactivity
for the two
Received Mar. 13, 1992; revised May 26, 1992; accepted May 28, 1992.
This work was supported by Grants NS 2 1377 and NS 223 17 from the National
Institutes of Health, United States Public Health Service. E.R. was the recipient
of a Fullbright fellowship and a Fogatty international
fellowship. G.W.H. was the
recipient of a National Institute of Mental Health predoctoral
fellowship. We
thank Phong Nguyen for technical help.
Correspondence
should be addressed to Dr. E. G. Jones at above address.
“Present address: Department
of Morphology,
University
Autonoma at Madrid,
School of Medicine, 28209 Madrid, Spain.
%esent address: Department of Anatomy, Chonnam University Medical School,
Seoul, Korea.
cPresent Address: Department
of Neurobiology,
The Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029-6574.
Copyright 0 1992 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/92/124088-24$05.00/O

calcium-binding
proteins.
The small-celled,
CO-weak,
calbindin-positive
zones of VPL and VPM appear to form part
of a wider system of smaller thalamic neurons unconstrained
by traditional
nuclear boundaries
that are preferentially
the
targets of spinothalamic
and caudal trigeminal
inputs, and
that may have preferential
access to layer I of SI.

The mammalianthalamushastraditionally beenviewed asmade
up ofa seriesofnuclear subunits,eachreceiving the terminations
of a particular afferent pathway and projecting to a functional
areaof the cerebralcortex (historically reviewed in LeGros Clark,
1932; Walker, 1938; Jones, 1985). In recent years, this timehonored principle hasbeenextended and modified in a number
of ways. New evidence showsthat many, perhapsall, thalamic
nuclei contain subpopulationsof relay neurons that project differentially upon the cerebral cortex. Different neuronsin a single
nucleusmay project to different areas,singleneuronsmay project by branchedaxons to more than a singlearea,and the axons
of different cells may have terminations in different layers or
different densitiesof terminations in the cortex (seereviews by
Herkenham, 1986; Macchi, 1988). The identification of these
different classesof thalamocortical relay neuron has proceeded
along a number of lines. These include physiological identification in terms of receptive field and stimulus-responsepatterns
(e.g., Gordon and Manson, 1967; Cleland et al., 1971; Chung
et al., 1986a,b), structure-function correlations made by the
intracellular labeling of physiologically identified neurons(e.g.,
Friedlander et al., 1981; Stanford et al., 1983; Yen et al., 1985),
retrograde labeling by anatomical tracers applied to different
areasand layers of the cerebral cortex (e.g., Macchi et al., 1984;
Rausell and Avendafio, 1985; Minciacchi et al., 1986; Bimbather and Albus, 1987; Morel and Imig, 1987; Avendaiio et
al., 1990; Hashikawa et al., 1991; Kaske et al., 1991) and immunocytochemistry for cell-specificproteins (e.g.,Hendry et al.,
1988; Hockfield and Sur, 1990). Immunocytochemical staining
for the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin, and the 28 kDa,
vitamin D-dependent calcium-binding protein calbindin has
been particularly fruitful in identifying separatepopulations of
relay neurons, especially in the primate thalamus (Jonesand
Hendry, 1989).
In the somatosensorythalamus,composedof the ventral posterior and certain adjacent nuclei, retrograde tracing studiesin
carnivores (Penny et al., 1982; Rausell and Avendaiio, 1985;
Avendaiio et al., 1990) revealed the presenceof a population
of cells of small diameter that project specifically to layer I of
the somatosensorycortex. In a recent investigation in the monkey, a similar layer I-projecting, small-celled population was

The Journal

identified in the ventral posterior medial nucleus (VPM) in which
the cutaneous and mucosal surfaces innervated by the trigeminal
nerve are represented (Rausell and Jones, 199 1a,b). Apart from
their .smaller size, these neurons could also be identified by
immunoreactivity for calbindin and by being concentrated in a
compartment of the nucleus characterized by weak histochemical staining for the mitochondrial enzyme cytochrome oxidase
(CO). This small-celled, calbindin-rich and CO-weak compartment of VPM forms a matrix of the nucleus in which are embedded elongated clusters of large- and medium-sized neurons
projecting to deeper layers of the somatosensory cortex. These
clusters or “rods” are further characterized by high CO activity
and their contained relay neurons by immunoreactivity for parvalbumin and for the proteoglycan identified by the monoclonal
antibody CAT30 1. As a clue to the functional significance of
this compartmental organization of differentially projecting relay neurons, it was found that the matrix compartment is preferentially innervated by fibers ascending from the caudal nucleus
of the spinal trigeminal complex (Rausell and Jones, 199 la)
while the rod compartment is preferentially innervated by fibers
arising in the principal sensory trigeminal nucleus (Jones et al.,
1986a). These observations suggested the existence of parallel
pathways for the relay of pain and temperature and for innocuous tactile information from the face to different layers of the
somatosensory cortex.
Populations of calbindin- and parvalbumin-immunoreactive
relay neurons have also been identified in the monkey ventral
posterior lateral nucleus (VPL) (Jones and Hendry, 1989) in
which the remainder of the body is represented (Mountcastle
and Henneman, 1952; Mountcastle and Poggio, 1963; Jones
and Friedman, 1982; Kaas et al., 1984). This subnucleus is CO
rich, and in primates both spinothalamic and medial lemniscal
fibers terminate in it (Mehler et al., 1960; Bowsher, 196 1; Mehler, 1969; Kerr and Lippman, 1974; Kerr, 1975; Boivie, 1978,
1979; Applebaum et al., 1979; Berkley, 1980; Tracey et al.,
1980; Jones et al., 1982; Asanuma et al., 1983; Burton and Craig,
1983; Mantyh, 1983; Apkarian and Hodge, 1989~). However,
any relationship of the calbindin- and parvalbumin-immunoreactive cells to a compartmental organization or to the differential terminations of the two somatosensory pathways, and the
possibility of their differential projections upon the somatosensory cortex have not been revealed. This article reports the
results of such an investigation.
A preliminary account has appeared in abstract form (Rausell
et al., 1991).

Materials

of Neuroscience,

October

1 SW,

1,310)

4089

C

and Methods

The experiments were carried out on 21 adult monkeys (17 A4ucucu
fascicularis and 4 Macaca fiscatu), weighing 3.0-3.5 kg. Ten of the
animals were normal and had been used in previous immunocytochemical studies on VPM (Jones and Hendry, 1989;Rauselland Jones,
199 1b). Of the other 11,6 were used in combined immunocytochemical
and tracing studies, involving injections of anterogradely or retrogradely
transDorted FastBlue0%). Theremaining
five wereusedfor anterograde Figure 1. Placements of retrogradely (A-C) and anterogradely (0)
transported tracers in the cerebral cortex or spinal cord. A, Stippling
or retrograde tracing ‘studies involving injections of horseradish per-

D

oxidase(HRP).

Immunocytochemistry. Animalsweredeeplyanesthetized
with intravenous Nembutal and Derfused through the left ventricle with 300 ml
saline, followed by 3 liters of a fixative containing 2.0% paraformaldehvde and 0.1 or 0.2% dutaraldehvde in 0.1 M DhosDhate buffer (DH
7.4i and then successively with 10% 15%, and 20% sucrose in 0. i-M
phosphate buffer. The brains were removed, infiltrated with 30% sucrose, blocked, frozen in dry ice, and sectioned on a sliding microtome.
The thalami were serially sectioned in the frontal, sagittal, or horizontal
planes into six series of alternating 15 pm and 30 pm sections. Every

over right pre-andpostcentralgyri indicatesmaximalextent of spread

of FB or HRP aDDlied to surface of the cortex. Solid circles and hatching
in left postcentrai gyrus indicate injection sites and maximal spread of
FB or HRP when injected via micropipettes into the physiologically
localized hand representation. B and C show camera lucida drawings
of sections taken through a brain in which FB was applied to the surface
of the postcentral gyrus only (arrows, B) or injected into area 3b (C). D
shows three micropipette tracks (lines) and maximal spread of HRP
(hatching) when injected into the lateral and ventral funiculi at the
second cervical segment of the spinal cord. Scale bars, 1 mm.

4090

Rausell et al.

l

Calbindin

and Parvalbumin

Ceils in VPL

15 brn section was stained, free floating, for immunocytochemistry.
Parvalbumin was localized by means of a sheep anti-parvalbumin
antiserum (see Jones and Hendry, 1989) or a mouse monoclonal antibody
(Sigma). Calbindin was localized with a rabbit anti-calbindin antiserum
(see Jones and Hendry, 1989) that will also recognize 29 kDa calretinin
(Rogers, 1987). The monoclonal antibodies and antisera were diluted
in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) containing 0.25% Triton X-100 and
3% normal serum of the species in which the secondary antibody to be
used was raised. Final dilutions of the primary antisera or antibodies
were 1:3000. The sections were preincubated for l-2 hr in 0.1 M phosphate buffer containing 3% normal serum and 0.25% Triton X- 100 and
then transferred to the primary antibody-containing
solution for 24-36
hr at 4°C. The sections were then washed thoroughly in phosphate buffer
and stained by the avidin-biotin-peroxidase
complex method (ABC,
Vectastain). Immunoreactivity was finally developed by incubation in
a solution of 0.02% 3,3’-diaminobenzidine
tetrahvdrochloride
and
0.00 1% hydrogen peroxide. The alternating series of 30 pm sections was
stained histochemically for cytochrome oxidase (CO) (Wang-Riley, 1979),
or with 0.25% thionin. Controls for these and the subsequently described
immunocytochemical procedures consisted of staining selected sections
using preimmune serum in place of the primaries, and by staining using
antibodies or antisera that had been subjected to preadsorption in an
excess of parvalbumin (Sigma) or calbindin (Sigma). None of these
procedures revealed other than a light, diffuse background, and no cells
were stained.
In two of the normal animals, one Macaca fascicularis and one Macaca fuscata, counts and measurements were made of the somal sizes
of parvalbumin- and calbindin-immunoreactive
neurons in VPL. Two
series of 10 sections, each section separated by 180 pm from its neighbors, were selected; one series was stained immunocytochemically
for
calbindin, and the other, for parvalbumin. In each section, areas measuring 0.70 mm2 or 0.77 mmz, as outlined by an eyepiece reticule, were
selected from the center, medial, and anterodorsal aspects of VPL. All
immunoreactive neuronal somata falling within the reticule were then
counted, and the outlines of those containing and not containing a
sectioned nucleus were separately traced with the camera lucida at 1000 x .
Diameters and areas were then determined using a Zeiss, Zidas digitizing
tablet. Differences between the sizes of parvalbumin- and calbindinimmunoreactive neurons were compared using Student’s t test and multiple analysis of variance (ANOVA). To calculate the number of cells
per volume, the stereological formula of DeHoff and Rhines (1961;
Montero and Zempel, 1986) was used.
Anterograde tracing. In two monkeys, Fast Blue (FB) was injected into
the spinal cord (Fig. 1). The monkeys were anesthetized with intravenous Nembutal, and under aseptic conditions the neck muscles were
detached from the occipital bone on one side to expose the posterior
aspects of the second, third, and fourth cervical vertebrae. The laminae
of one of these vertebrae were removed, and the dura mater was incised.
A micropipette with a tip diameter of 20-30 Nrn, attached to a 10 ~1
Hamilton syringe and coupled to an oil-filled hydraulic system, was
introduced vertically into the anterolateral quadrant of the spinal cord
at approximately the third cervical segment. A 5% aqueous solution of
fast blue (24 ~1) was injected in one or more penetrations. After a 2
week survival period, the animals were deeply anesthetized and perfused

Figure 2. Trios of closely adjacent frontal sections through anterior
(A-C), middle (D-F, G-I), and posterior (J-L) levels of the thalamus
of a normal monkey and stained for CO activity (CO: A, D, G, J),
parvalbumin immunoreactivity
(PARV B, E, H, K), or calbindin immunoreactivity (CALB: C, F, I, L). Arrows indicate the same blood
vessels in each trio. Arrowheads in A-C indicate lamina between centre
median nucleus (CM) and VPM in which calbindin matrix of VPM first
becomes evident. This expands as a CO-weak, parvalbumin-negative
but calbindin-rich region (s) at more posterior levels, becoming the
posterior “cap” in J-L. Note CO-weak, parvalbumin-negative
zones in
VPL in D-F and G-I (open arrows in G-l). Calbindin cells are scattered
throughout VPL. For sections at a more posterior level, see Figure 4GI. In this and subsequent illustrations, approximate stereotaxic levels,
derived from section thickness and position in a series, are shown at
top left of each row. These provide an indication of anterior, middle,
and posterior levels through VPL, which normally extends from approximately A6 anteriorly to A2 posteriorly. For other abbreviations,
see Appendix. Scale bars, 1 mm (E also for A, B, and D; F also for C,
H also for G, J, and K, Z also for L).

with a mixture of 4% paraformaldehyde and 0.2% glutaraldehyde in 0.1
M phosphate buffer. The brain and spinal cord were removed, blocked,
and frozen in dry ice. Six series of alternating 15-pm- and 30-pm-thick
frontal or sagittal sections of the thalamus and transverse sections of
the brainstem and spinal cord were collected in cold 0.1 M phosphate
buffer. The first 30 pm section of each group of six sections was mounted
quickly for immediate examination under the fluorescence microscope

The Journal of Neuroscience,

and photography of anterogradely labeled fibers. The adjacent 30 pm
section was stained with 0.25% thionin. The remaining 30 pm sections
were processed for CO histochemistry. The 15 Nrn sections were stained
immunocytochemically
for the localization ofparvalbumin or calbindin
or for both of these simultaneously. For the localization of a single
antigen, a procedure similar to that described above was followed, using
the same dilutions of primary antibody but without the addition of

October

1992, 12(10)

4091

Triton X-100. Then, the sections were washed and incubated for 2 hr
at 4°C in a 1:200 solution of a fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit or rhodamine isothiocyanate (RITC)-conjugated donkey anti-sheep secondary antibody (Chemicon). For colocalization of the two antigens, the sections were preincubated in 3%
normal horse serum without Triton X-100 and then incubated in solutions containing 3% normal horse serum and anti-calbindin and anti-

4992 Rausell et al.

l

Calbindin and Pafvalbumin

Cells in VPL

..

..pARV,_,
,.‘.

,

.’ I .P

Figure 2. Continued.
parvalbumin antisera in the same dilutions as described above for 24
hr at 4°C. Then, the sections were washed and incubated for 2 hr at 4°C
in a solution containing both PITC-labeled donkey anti-rabbit and RITClabeled donkey anti-sheep secondaries. The sections were washed, immediately mounted, and coverslipped with a 1:3 mixture of glycerol
and phosphate buffer. In parallel, additional series of sections were

immunostained by the ABC method using the same procedures described earlier.
In two other monkeys the same approach was used to inject 2-4 pl
of 20% horseradish peroxidase (HRP) (Sigma) in normal saline into the
anterolateral quadrant of the upper cervical spinal cord. After a survival
period of 48 hr, the animals were deeply anesthetized and perfused

The Journal

through the heart with a mixture of 1% paraformaldehyde and 2.5%
glutaraldehyde. The brains and spinal cords were infiltrated with 30%
sucrose in 0.1 M phosphate buffer and then blocked, frozen, and sectioned serially at 50 pm on a sliding microtome. In the thalami, two
series of frontal sections were stained for HRP using the tetramethylbenzidine reaction (Mesulam, 1978); one of these series was counterstained with thionin. The third series was stained for CO.
The fluorescence material was studied in a Leitz Dialux epifluores-

of Neuroscience,

October

1992,

72(10)

4093

cence microscope equipped with wideband ultraviolet, rhodamine, and
fluorescein filter packs. Camera lucida drawings of the sections were
made at high and low magnification, and the ramifications of axons
anterogradely labeled with Fast Blue and found in the VPL were plotted
on them. Camera lucida drawings of the adjacent Nissl-stained sections
were then used for outlining the borders of the nucleus, and similar
drawings of the distribution of CO staining in other adjacent sections
were latersuperimposed, using the outlines of the sectioned blood vessels as landmarks.
The material processed for HRP histochemistry was analyzed by light
microscopy. Camera lucida drawings were made of serial sections at
low magnification, and labeled terminal ramifications were plotted on
the drawings from microscopic examination at higher magnification,
using blood vessel profiles as guides. Camera lucida drawings were also
made of the CO-stained sections, and regions of VPL that showed
different intensities of histochemical staining were outlined. The drawings of the sections containing HRP-labeled fibers were then superimposed on those of the CO-stained sections, and correlations were made
of the locations of CO activity and HRP-labeled terminal ramifications.
Retrograde labeling. In four monkeys, bilateral craniotomies were
made under intravenous Nembutal anesthesia and aseptic conditions
to expose the left and right postcentral gyri or both the pre- and postcentral gyri on each side. On the left side in two animals, penetrations
with a tungsten microelectrode were made in the first somatosensory
area (SI) in a region corresponding to the middle third of the postcentral
gyrus, in order to locate and partially map, by means of multiunit
recording, the cortical region containing the representation of the upper
limb. Upon identification of a region containing neurons responding to
tactile stimulation of the contralateral hand or arm, the recording electrode was replaced by a micropipette with a tip diameter of 20-50 pm
and filled with 5% aqueous Fast Blue (Fig. 1). This was lowered to a
depth of l-l.5 mm, and 0.1-0.2 ~1 was injected at this and at two to
four surrounding sites by air pressure pulses. On the right side, an
approximately corresponding cortical region was located visually, but
electrode penetrations were not made in it. The arachnoid mater spanning the central sulcus was incised in this region to permit dye to flow
into the central sulcus. An area approximately 1 cm2 was gently rubbed
with cotton that had been soaked in 0.1 M acetate buffer (PH 3.5) until
hyperemia was detected at the cortical surface (Fig. 1). Then, a piece of
filter paper, previously soaked in 5% Fast Blue solution, was applied to
the cortical surface. After 10 min, it was removed and replaced with a
second piece of filter paper also soaked in Fast Blue solution that was
left in place. In the other two animals, similar procedures were carried
out but the injections and superficial deposits were made in or applied
to the adjacent part of the precentral gyri as well. The animals survived
for 2 weeks. After that period, they were deeply anesthetized with intravenous Nembutal and perfused with 4% parafonnaldehyde and 0.2%
glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer. All brains were removed,
infiltrated with 30% sucrose, blocked, frozen in dry ice, and sectioned
on a sliding microtome. The cortical blocks containing the injection
sites were cut into 30 pm sagittal sections and mounted immediately
to determine the spread of the injection or superficial application of
Fast Blue. An adjacent series was stained with thionin. The thalami
from these brains were cut in series of alternating 15 pm and 30 pm
frontal or horizontal sections. The 30 pm sections were processed for
Nissl staining and CO histochemistry, while the 15 pm sections were
processed for single or double immunofluorescence staining for calbindin and/or parvalbumin.
In three monkeys, the identical procedure was followed for exposing
and identifying the upper limb representation but HRP was injected
and applied instead of Fast Blue. A micropipette with a tip diameter of
20 pm and containing a 20% solution of HRP in normal saline was
returned to one of the recording tracks and lowered to a depth of 1.5
mm, and 0.05 ~1 was injected by air pressure. On the homotopic region
of the opposite hemisphere, a superficial deposit of HRP was made,
using a piece of filter paper soaked in 50% HRP. The animals survived
for 2 d and were then deeply anesthetized and perfused with 1% paraformaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer. The
brains were removed, blocked, infiltrated with 30% sucrose, frozen in
dry ice, and sectioned on a sliding microtome. Blocks containing the
thalamus and SI were cut into a series of 50 pm frontal or sagittal
sections. Two out of every four sections were processed by the tetramethylbenzidine method. Every other section of these two was counterstained with thionin. The remaining pair was stained for CO or with
thionin. The outlines of the neurons retrogradely labeled after deep
injections and superficial applications of HRP were drawn at high mag-

4994 Raussll et al.

l

Calbindin and Parvalbumin

Cells in VPL

CM 219

reactive cellsto compartments of VPL defined by CO staining
(Figs. 2, 3; Table l), (2) the locations of SI-projecting cells in
relation

to the CO compartments

and the parvalbumin-

and

calbindin-immunoreactive cells (Figs. 4-lo), and (3) the relationships of spinothalamic
partments (Figs. 11-14).

fiber terminations
to the CO comTo avoid duplication
of figures, the

description of the CO compartments and distributions of parvalbumin- and calbindin-immunoreactive
cells will be made by
reference to figures that appear in all three major sections of the

results(Figs. 2, 4, 5-7, 11, 12).
CO compartmentsin VPL

123456
Region sampled

FM 10

123456

Region sampled
Figure 3. Sizes of somata of calbindin- (1-3) and parvalbumin- (4-6)
immunoreactive somata in the core (I, 4) medial (2, 5) and anterodorsal (3, 6) aspects of VPL in two monkeys (CM219, FMIO). Calbindin-immunoreactive somata are consistently smaller than parvalbuminimmunoreactive somata. Asterisks indicate that differences are statistically significant (P < 0.00 1).
nification (100x) with a camera lucida. Only neurons cut through the
nucleus were plotted, and care was taken not to include in the outline
the stained initial segments of axons and dendrites. The perimeters and
areas of these neurons were measured by means of the digitizing tablet.
For each case, the somal areas of thalamocortical neurons labeled by
superficial applications of HRP were compared with those of neurons
labeled by deep injections, using the nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis and
Mann-Whitney
U tests.

Results
The resultsare presentedin three major sectionsdealing with
(1) the relationships of parvalbumin- and calbindin-immuno-

CO staining in VPL is not homogeneous
(Figs. 2A,D,G,J). In
the anterior one-third of the nucleus,CO activity is consistently
weakerthan in the medially adjacent VPM, and similar in density to that in the moderately to lightly stainedventral posterior
inferior nucleus(VPI) and ventral lateral posteriornucleus(VLp).
This is well seenin horizontal sections(Fig. 5A). On moving
posteriorly, there is an increasein CO stainingthat first becomes
visible in the media1part of VPL (Fig. 2A). In VPL, asin VPM,
both neuropil and neuronal somatashow CO activity. In VPL,
the pattern of CO staining is broken by horizontal bundles of
unstained fibers that crossthe nucleus from medial to lateral,
toward the internal capsule,and alsoby two or more incomplete
vertical laminae of absent staining that tend to divide the nucleusinto medial and lateral parts. Of theselaminae, a medial
one is the most distinct and clearly separatesVPL from VPM,
except for its most dorsal portion where the two nuclei tend to
merge(Fig. 2A). A secondlamina is commonly present in the
middle of the mediolateral extent of VPL (Fig. 2A,D,G). Apart
from the fiber bundles,CO stainingin the anterior third of VPL
is relatively evenly distributed. However, even here a number
of zones of variable size and length that show enhanced CO
staining alternate with other areasof weaker CO activity. The
contrast betweenCO-rich and CO-weak zonesbecomesfar more
evident in the middle third of VPL (Fig. 20, seealso Figs. 40,
5A). Although the density of the more heavily stained zones
never approachesthat in VPM, it is significantly heavier than
in the anterior third of VPL, sothat the contrast betweenweakly
and denselystainedzonesis enhanced.The staining level of the
paler zonesis comparableto that in the matrix region (Rausell
and Jones, 1991b) of VPM and in the basal ventral medial
nucleus(VMb) and VP1 (Fig. 20,G).
In the posterior one-third of VPL, the weakly stained areas
in the interior of VPL expand and start to merge with one
another closeto the medial aspectof the nucleus,the unstained
fiber lamina separatingVPL and VPM breaks down, and the
CO-weak zonesof VPL alsomergewith the VPM matrix at the
posterior poleof VPM. A CO-weak posterior cap is then defined
in the posteromedialaspect of VPL and covers the posterior
pole of VPM (Fig. 2J; seealso Figs. 4G, 12F). This lies anteromedial to the anterior pulvinar nucleus(PLa) and mergeswith
the posterior group of nuclei (PO)and with PLa. The PLa nucleus, medial to VPM, showsweak CO staining of a density
similar to that in the VPM matrix. The two are incompletely
separatedby a thin, partial, fiber lamina that is unstained for
CO. As the matrix of VPM and the CO-weak zones of VPL
expand to form the posterior cap, the unstainedlamina breaks
down, so that PLa is no longer separatedfrom the cap or from
the posterior nuclear region. It can usually be distinguishedby
a slightly greater density of CO staining (Fig. 20
After overlapping camera lucida drawings and photomicro-

The Journal

Table 1. Densities
by area (iv,) and by volume
parts of VPL of two monkeys
(CM219,
FMlO)

(NJ

of calbindin-

and parvalbumin-immunoreactive

somata

of Neuroscience,

October

1992,

in the core, medial,

fZ(10)

4095

and anterodorsal

N

Area sampled
(mm?

N”

d (md

D (d

N”

112
198

0.70
0.77

160.4 (38%)
257.1 (62%)

7.61
7.9

9.66
10.03

842 (39.5%)
1285 (60.5%)

143
225

0.70
0.77

204
292.2

(41%)
(59%)

7.12
8.29

9.04
10.5

1113 (44%)
1390 (56%)

101
157

0.70
0.77

144.2 (41%)
203.8 (59%)

7.52
8.40

9.55
10.66

758 (44%)

96
176

0.77
0.77

124.6 (35%)
228.5 (65%)

8.00
8.30

10.16
10.54

623 (36%)
1088 (64%)

145
151

0.77
0.77

188.3 (45%)
196
(55%)

8.00
8.50

10.16
10.79

941 (50%)
933 (50%)

108
132

0.77
0.77

140.2 (45%)

8.00
8.20

10.16
10.40

701 (45%)
857 (55%)

CM219
VPL core
Calbindin
Parvalbumin
VPL medial
Calbindin
Parvalbumin
VPL ant/dot-s
Calbindin
Parvalbumin
FM10
VPL core
Calbindin
Parvalbumin
VPL medial
Calbindin
Parvalbumin
VPL ant/dors
Calbindin
Parvalbumin

171.4 (55%)

970 (56%)

Mean diameter (d) of the somatic profiles was calculated from d = -,-in
which-,4 is the area of each profile. Density by volume was calculated by the DeHoff and
Rhines (196 1) formula, N, = N,/Dxi where D is mean tangent diameter (D = 4/md), and f, the thickness of the section (15 pm). Only somata with nuclei cut in the
plane of the sections were used. Percentages are those relative to the total immunoreactive
population, not to the total population of VPL neurons.

graphs obtained from adjacent Nissl-stained and CO-stained
sections, it becomes clear that there is a strong tendency for the
CO-weak zones of VPL to correspond to parts of VPL dominated by smaller neurons and for the CO-rich regions to correspond to parts of VPL containing mixed populations of smaller and larger cells (Fig. 4A-H).
Deferential distribution of parvalbumin and calbindin
Parvalbumin. Parvalbumin immunoreactivity is present in large
numbers of neuronal somata throughout VPL (Fig. 2; seen also
at high magnification in Fig. 1OB). The entire nucleus, and especially the posteromedial two-thirds, is traversed by large numbers of parvalbumin-immunoreactive
fibers ascending from the
medial lemniscus and entering VPL through VP1 and VMb (Fig.
2B). Parvalbumin-positive
fibers are also contained within fiber
bundles corresponding to the unstained bundles seen in COstained preparations (Fig. 2&Y). Within the nucleus, many irregularly arranged fiber segments and terminal-like boutons are
parvalbumin immunoreactive and fill the neuropil between the
parvalbumin-immunoreactive
cell bodies (Fig. 1OB).
Immunoreactivity
for parvalbumin is shown in different degrees by VPL neurons. Large neurons tend to be densely stained,
whereas the staining of medium- and smaller-sized neurons is
variable, and both densely and weakly stained somata can be
found among them. The distribution of parvalbumin-immunoreactive neurons in VPL varies depending on the anteroposterior level and tends to follow the zones of denser CO staining
seen in adjacent sections (Fig. 2D,E,G,H). Groups of densely
stained neurons and surrounding fibers tend to be concentrated
in ventral and medial regions in anterior parts of the nucleus
(Fig. 2B). In the middle third of the nucleus, parvalbumin immunoreactivity is more widespread but is often interrupted by

regions that contain fewer parvalbumin-positive
fibers and few
or no parvalbumin-immunoreactive
cells (Fig. 2E, G). These
correspond to CO-weak regions in the adjacent sections (Fig.
20, G). Close to the posterior pole of the nucleus and conforming
to the posterior cap, the dorsal and medial periphery of VPL
shows more scattered parvalbumin-immunoreactive
cells and
fewer immunoreactive fibers than the lateral aspect, the two
regions corresponding to zones of weak and dense CO-staining,
respectively (Fig. 2J,K, 4GJ). The cap is devoid of parvalbumin-immunoreactive
cells, and any immunoreactive fibers in
it are vertical and appear to be ascending through it from the
medial lemniscus (Fig. 41).
Calbindin. Calbindin immunoreactivity is present throughout
VPL. Although the calbindin antiserum does not distinguish
between 28 kDa calbindin and 29 kDa calretinin, for ease of
description, immunostaining with it will be referred to as calbindin immunoreactivity.
The density of calbindin immunostaining is considerably less than the density of parvalbumin
immunostaining (Fig. 2C,F,Z,,L, seen also in Figs. 6B, 11). This
appearance is due primarily to the virtual absence of calbindin
immunoreactivity in fibers in the nucleus, but there also appears
to be significantly fewer calbindin cell somata. (This is confirmed
quantitatively below.) Mainly medium- and small-sized neurons
are stained for calbindin, but occasional large cells are also stained
(Fig. lOD,fl. A few calbindin-immunoreactive
fibers can be
seen leaving VPL and entering the reticular nucleus. However,
no calbindin-positive fibers can be seen entering VPL from the
medial lemniscus.
When comparing Nissl-stained, CO-stained, and parvalbumin- or calbindin-immunostained
sections, there is a slight tendency for calbindin immunoreactivity
in VPL to occur in a
pattern complementary to that of dense CO staining and par-

4096 Rausell et al.

l

Calbindin

and Pawalbumin

Cells in VPL

valbumin immunoreactivity (Fig. 2). In sagittal sections, in particular (Fig. 1l), calbindin-immunoreactive
cells appear more
concentrated in the anterodorsal aspect of VPL (Fig. 1 l), forming a shell that curves medially to merge with the matrix zone
of VPM, ventrally to merge with VPI, and posteriorly to merge
with the VPL/VPM cap and with PLa, PO, and the suprageniculate nucleus (SG). That is, the region of denser calbindin staining
tends to be continuous with regions of VPM and with other
nuclei that contain high densities of small cells and show weak
CO staining, high calbindin immunoreactivity,
and weak or
absent parvalbumin immunoreactivity (Figs. 2,4,5). Elsewhere
in VPL, small groups of isolated, calbindin-positive cells are
widely scattered (Figs. 2, 5, 11). No part of the nucleus is completely free of calbindin cells, but the absence of parvalbuminimmunoreactive cells from the CO-weak zones ensures that
these zones are dominated by calbindin cells (Fig. 2G-Z).

Colocalization. The majority of cells identified in sections
stained by indirect immunofluorescence for calbindin and parvalbumin were stained for one antigen only, confirming data
previously reported in detail by Jones and Hendry (1989). An
occasional cell among the larger neurons in regions corresponding to the CO-dense and parvalbumin-rich zones, however, was
immunoreactive for both antigens.
Sizes and densities of parvalbumin and caibindin cells. Figure
3 shows the mean areas of calbindin- and parvalbumin-immunoreactive somata sampled from the core of VPL and from
its lateral and medial aspects in two animals. In each of the
three regions of each animal, calbindin cells are consistently
smaller than parvalbumin cells (p < O.OOl), but there is no
difference in the sizes of calbindin cells when different regions
of the same nuclei are compared (p < 0.9). Statistical testing
by multiple ANOVA indicated that all neurons in one animal

the Journal of Neuroscience,

FB

0

October

1992, f2(10)

4097

\\’
Figure 4. Pairs (A, B, D, E, G,,H) of
adjacent CO- and Nissl-stained frontal
sections at anterior, middle, and posterior levels ofVPL, matched to camera
lucida drawings of a third closely adjacent section from the same brain on
which are plotted the distributions of
cells retrogradely labeled as the result
of injecting FB into layers I-V of the SI
hand representation (C, F, .Z).Z, stained
immunocytochemically
for parvalbumin, is adjacent to section from which
J was drawn. Arrows indicate same
blood vessels. Note presence of small,
Nissl-stained somata in CO-weak zones
(s), correspondence of CO-weak, smallcelled, posterior VPL/VPM cap in G
and H with lack of parvalbumin-immunoreactive somata (I), and presence
of retrogradely labeled cells in both COweak and CO-rich compartments. For
abbreviations, see Appendix. Scale bars,
1 mm (E also for A, B, and D, F also
for C, H also for G, J also for I).

larger than those of the secondand that this difference approached statistical significance (F = 8.046; P =
0.0046). However, the sizesof neurons stainedfor calbindin or
parvalbumin showed far greater differences that were highly
significant statistically (F = 38.441; P = 0.0001) and could not
be accountedfor on the basisof interanimal variability. Crosscomparisonsof sizes of cells stained for a particular calciumbinding protein in different regions (P = 0.8373) of animal
versus calcium-binding protein (P = 0.0477), of animal versus
region (P = 0.3562) of calcium-binding protein versus region
(P = 0.2966) and of animal versus protein versus region (P =
0.9066) showed that somal size differences are not affected by
the region of VPL sampled.
The density of calbindin neuronstended to be lower than that
of parvalbumin neurons(Table l), the calbindin cells,with one
exception forming lessthan 45% by volume of the total popu-

were slightly

for the two proteins in a given
region of the nucleus. There was a consistent trend in the difference between densitiesof calbindin cells from region to region. In both animals, density by volume was lower (36% and
39%) in the core than in the medial (50% and 44%) and anterodorsal (45% and 44%) aspectsof VPL.
lation of neurons immunoreactive

Laminar projections to SI: FB and HRP labeling
After injections of the tracers that involve all layers of SI, retrogradely labeled neurons are found in a lamella in the medial
aspectof VPL and extend dorsoventrally and anteroposteriorly
through the nucleusin a region correspondingto the upper limb
representation (Fig. 4). Large, medium, and small somata are
labeled (Fig. 1OC’).Superimposition of camera lucida plottings
of cellsand photomicrographsof CO- and Nissl-stainedsections
reveals that the neurons occupy both CO-rich and CO-weak

4999 Rausell et al.

l

Calbindin and Parvalbumin

I HRP

Cells in VPL

_-

--l\\

Figure 5. Frontal sections (A, B) stained for CO activity matched to camera lucida drawings of adjacent sections (C, 0) showing the distribution
of cells retrogradely labeled with HRP after placement of the material on the surface of SI in the upper limb region. Labeled cells are found
particularly, although not exclusively, in the CO-weak (s) zones. For abbreviatons, see Appendix. Arrows indicate same blood vessels. Scale bars,
1 mm.

parts of VPL, and include small labeled neurons in the cap on
the posterior surface of VPM (Fig. 4). After superficial applications of FR or HRP confined to layer I or layers I and II of
SI, retrogradely labeled neurons are found only in VPL and the
posterior cap (Fig. 5). After applications affecting the surface of

the precentral gyrus as well, additional labeling is seen in VLp
(Fig. 6). Superficial applications of tracer tend to label small
neurons in dorsomedial and ventroposterior parts of VPL (and
in dorsolateral parts of VLp when the precentral gyrus is affected). Camera lucida drawings of sections through VPL show-

The Journal of Neuroscience,

October

1992, 72(10) 4099

Figure 6. A trio of adjacent horizontal sections through VPL at approximate stereotaxic level +9, stained for CO activity (A), for calbindin
immunoreactivity
(II), and with thionin (C), and matched to a camera lucida tracing (0) of a fourth section on which cells retrogradely labeled
following placement of FB on the surfaces of the pre- and postcentral gyri, are plotted. Arrows indicate same blood vessels. Note correspondence
of small-celled regions with CO-weak anterodorsal part of VPL and presence of retrogradely labeled cells in this region and in small-celled region
(s) adjacent to VPM and PLa nuclei. For abbreviatons, see Appendix. Scale bars, 1 mm.

4100

Rausell et al. * Calbindin

and Pawalbumin

Cells in VPL

Figure 7. Enlarged
view ofpart ofCOd

stainedsection(A) shownin Figure54
matchedto a photomicrograph
of the
sameregionof the uncounterstained,
adjacentsectioncontaining HRP-labeledcells.Notepresence
of labeledcells
in regionscorresponding
to CO-weak
zones(s).Arrows indicatesameblood
vessels.For abbreviatons,seeAppendix. Scalebar, 500pm.

ing the distribution of retrogradely labeledneuronsafter superficial applications of tracers, when superimposed on
photomicrographsof CO- and Nissl-stainedsections,reveal that
the labeledneuronsare found in regionsof both denseand weak
CO activity (Figs. 5-7). Many, however, are concentrated anterodorsally and posteroventrally in VPL where CO activity is
weak and especiallyin the CO-weak posterior cap (Fig. 6). When
found at the centerof VPL, the retrogradely labeled,superficially
projecting neuronsaresituated in CO-weak and CO-densezones
but tend to be concentrated in zonesof small cellsand weaker
CO staining (Fig. 7).
The somal sizes of thalamocortical neurons retrogradely labeled after HRP injections affecting layers I-V of SI showeda
wider rangethan thoseof thalamocortical neuronsretrogradely
labeled after superficial depositson the surface of SI (Fig. 8).
The mean somal area of 709/oof the population of neurons
labeledafter injections involving layers I-V wascontained within the range of 200-400 Km2.The mean somal area of 70% of
the neuronslabeledafter superficialdepositswascontainedwithin
the range of 100-250 pm*. The difference between the area
values of the two populations wasstatistically highly significant
(p < 0.0001, Mann-Whitney U test).
Most of the neurons retrogradely labeled after superficial

placementsof FB (Fig. 9) are small (15 pm in diameter) and in
double-labeledpreparations 80-85% are also immunoreactive
for calbindin (Fig. lOE,I$ The remaining 15420%of the cells
labeledafter superficial placementsof FB are not immunoreactive for calbindin. These are typically small and located at the
posterior pole of VPL where its small-celled, CO-weak zones
merge with the cap on the posterior surface of VPM. No superficially projecting cellsare immunoreactive for parvalbumin.
Injections of FB involving layers I-V of SI typically label both
smallercalbindin-immunoreactive and medium- and larger-sized
parvalbumin-immunoreactive neurons (Fig. lOC,D).

Spinothalamic

terminations: FB and HRP labeling

Terminal ramifications of spinothalamic tract fibers, anterogradely labeled with FB or HRP, are found in the VPL and in
parts of adjoining nuclei, especiallyVLp, the central lateral nucleus(CL), VPI, and PObut with extension into the small-celled
matrix of VPM and into parts of PLa and SG (Figs. 11, 12)‘
The labeled terminal ramifications are concentrated in small
focal patches 200-500 pm in diameter in all of these nuclei.
When photographs and camera lucida plottings of the distributions of these labeled terminal ramifications in VPL are superimposed on photomicrographs showing the pattern of his-

The Journal

of Neuroscience,

October

1992,

72(10)

4101

n Deep
q Superficial

56

Ill0

ii0

20b

25b

360

3io

400

45b

50b

Soma size (pm2)
Figure 8. Percentages of neurons with different somal areas taken from
corresponding regions of the left and right VPL nuclei in which HRP
was injected into layers I-V of the SI upper limb representation on one
side (Deep) and placed on the surface of the homotopical region of the
opposite side (Superficial). Cells labeled from superficial placements of
tracer include a greater number of those with smaller somal sizes.

tochemical staining for CO, a generaltendency can be discerned
for the spinothalamic terminations to cluster in anterodorsal
and posteromedialaspectsof VPL, particularly in regionswhere
CO activity is weakest. This is clearly evident in the posterior
VPWVPM cap (Fig. 13). Patchesof terminations in the core of
VPL commonly, although not invariably, tend to associatewith
zonesof weak CO staining(Fig. 14A,B). In the adjoining nuclei,
especially VPI, PO, PLa, and the small-celled matrix of VPM,
the patchesof labeledspinothalamicterminations arevery clearly associatedwith nuclei or parts of nuclei that show weak CO
activity overall and high densitiesof calbindin cells. The useof
high concentrations of glutaraldehyde in the HRP fixative precluded direct immunocytochemical staining for parvalbumin
and calbindin in the HRP studies.In the FB experiments (Fig.
11) where the fixative permitted immunostaining of sections
containing FB-labeled fiber terminations for calbindin and/or
parvalbumin immunofluorescence,no spinothalamic fibers labeledwith FB could be seento be immunoreactive for calbindin
or parvalbumin (Fig. 14C,D).
Discussion
This investigation setout (1) to describethe distribution patterns
of relay neurons that differentially expressthe calcium-binding
proteins calbindin or parvalbumin in and around the monkey
VPL thalamic nucleusand (2) to determine to what extent these
cells show connectional relationships with the somatosensory
cortex and subcortical afferent pathwaysthat are similar to those
establishedpreviously for neurons in the VPM. Certain basic
principles defined for VPM (Joneset al., 1986a,b; Rausell and
Jones, 199la,b) appear to hold for VPL, but the clear compartmental organization of VPM is far less evident in VPL.
Principles that seemto hold for both VPM and VPL are (1) the
projection of calbindin-immunoreactive cells to the most superficial layer or layers of the cerebral cortex and of parvalbuinin-immunoreactive cellsto deeperlayers (the nature of deeper
injection placements precludes ruling out that calbindin cells

Figure 9. Photomicrograph of part of the surface of SI showing the
maximal extent of penetration of the dye following application of PB
to the hyperemic surface. Cells labeled in layer II have probably taken
up label via dendrites in layer I. Scale bar, 50 pm.

project to deeperlayers aswell asto layer I), (2) the consistently
smaller size of calbindin-immunoreactive cells in comparison
with parvalbumin-immunoreactive cells,and (3) the association
of parvalbumin-immunoreactive cells and parvalbumin-immunoreactive afferent fiber terminations with CO-rich domains.
One principle establishedin VPM that clearly doesnot hold
in VPL is the segregationof calbindin cells in a CO-weak compartment or matrix, although there are certain zones of VPL in
which CO-weak zones and calbindin cells coincide and from
which parvalbumin cells are excluded. In both nuclei there is a
strong tendency for caudal trigeminothalamic or spinothalamic
terminations to be concentrated in the CO-weak, calbindin-rich
matrix or posterior cap of VPM and in CO-weak zonesof VPL,
but in both subnuclei, especially VPL, there is a good deal of
overlap into the CO-rich, parvalbumin-rich domain.
Intense CO activity is a feature of the VPL and VPM in other
species(Wiener et al., 1987)aswell asprimates. The association
of CO-densestaining patterns in the ventral posterior complex
not only with the “lemniscal” (dorsal column and principal
trigeminal) systemof afferent fibers but also with parvalbumin
immunoreactivity in theseafferents and in thalamic relay cells,
is establishedby the following observations. Lemniscal fibers
terminate in denseclumps that in VPM, at least, are coextensive
with the CO-rich rods (Joneset al., 1986a,b). It is undoubtedly
the high density of mitochondria in the lemniscal terminals
(Ralston, 1969) that results in the intensity of CO activity in
zones in which these terminals are concentrated (Wong-Riley,
1979). The lemniscal fibers are parvalbumin positive; this is
revealed by direct immunostaining in the present and previous
studies(Jonesand Hendry, 1989)and by the lossofparvalbumin
immunoreactivity and of CO activity that occursin the medial
lemniscusand in the forelimb representationof VPL following
transneuronal degeneration of parvalbumin-immunoreactive
relay cells in the cuneate nucleus causedby spinal dorsal rhizotomies (Rausell et al., 1992). Afferent-tracing studiesreveal
a clear associationof trigeminal lemniscalterminations in VPM
with CO-rich rods that contain concentrated parvalbumin- and
GABA-immunoreactive cells but few or no calbindin-immunoreactive cells (Rausell and Jones, 1991a,b). The situation is
lessclear in VPL. Bulk labeling of lemniscal terminations by
autoradiography or other methods showsan evident clustering
pattern (cf., e.g., Fig. 12A of Asanuma et al., 1983, or Fig. 11

4102

Rausell

et al.

l

Calbindin

and

Parvalbumin

Cells

in VPL

Figure 10. Pairsof fluorescence
micro-graphs,
eachpair from the samemicroscopicfield. A, Retrogradelabelingwith FB of neuronsin VPL
followingan injectionof SI affectinglayersI-V. All of theseneuronsareimmunoreactivefor parvalbumin(B). Arrows indicatesamebloodvessel.

Note heavyparvalbuminimmunoreactivityin fibers.C, Retrogradelabelingof cellsin VPL followinginjectionof FB into layersI-V. Many, but
not all (D, arrows), of theseneuronsarealsoimmunoreactivefor calbindinin D. E, Retrogradelabelingof neuronsin the posteriorcapof VPW
VPM in an animalin which F’Bwasappliedto the surfaceof SI. Most, but not all (F, arrow), of theseneuronsareimmunoreactivefor calbindin
in F. Scalebar, 25 pm.
of Joneset al., 1982). Up to this time, however, theseclusters
have not been correlated with the CO-enriched zones of VPL.
A reexamination of material produced in the past in this laboratory indicatesthat a considerablenumber of lemniscalfibers
passesthrough the posterior, CO-weak cap of VPL/VPM en
route to VPL but that there are few or no terminal ramifications
there. This is evident also in Figures 2K and 41 of this article.
The CO-weak, small-celled, calbindin-positive cap receives
strongterminations of spinothalamicfibers. In it, therefore, there
is a clear dissociation of lemniscal and spinothalamic terminations akin to that seenin the matrix of VPM with which the
cap is continuous.

A similar, clear dissociation of lemniscal and spinothalamic
terminations is not evident in the remainder of VPL. Although
there is sometendency for spinothalamicterminations to cluster
in CO-weak zones that contain only calbindin cells, this is by
no meansan absolutefinding. Further investigations involving
strategiesto label both lemniscal and spinothalamic terminations contemporaneouslywill be necessaryto resolve the issue.
The most obvious correlation between the terminations of the
spinothalamic tract and the small-celled, CO-weak, calbindinrich domain is in the posterior cap where the matrix of VPM
and the small-celledzones of VPL converge.
The general distribution of spinothalamic tract terminations

0
VPL

\PLa

Figure Il. Pairs of adjacent sagittal sections at approximate stereotaxic levels indicated, stained immunocytochemically
for parvalbumin (left
column) or for calbindin (middle column) and matched to camera lucida drawings of a third adjacent section (right column) on which are plotted
the distributions of terminal ramifications of spinothalamic tract fibers anterogradely labeled with FB following injections in the second cervical
spinal segment. Arrows indicate same blood vessels. Note somewhat higher density of calbindin-immunoreactive
cells in anterodorsal aspect of
VPL and tendency for spinothalamic terminations to cluster there and in small-celled (s) cap at posterior pole of VPM. For abbreviatons, see
Appendix. Scale bars, 1 mm.

4104

Rausell

et al.

l

Calbindin

and Palvalbumin

Cells

in VPL

VPL

Figure 12: A series of frontal sections in anterior to posterior order (A, B, E, I;) at approximate stereotaxic levels indicated, stained for CO activity
and matched to camera lucida drawings of closely adjacent sections (C, D, G, H) on which are plotted the distributions of terminal ramifications
of spinothalamic fibers, labeled by injections of HRP into the second cervical spinal segment. Arrows indicate same blood vessels. Note concentrations
of spinothalamic terminations in CO-weak regions, including the posterior cap, which enlarges as CO-rich VPM rods start to disappear (F, H; see
also Fig. 13). For abbreviatons, see Appendix. Scale bars, 1 mm.
in the monkey thalamus has been described in a number of

studies(Mehler et al., 1960;Bowsher, 1961; Mehler, 1969;Kent
and Kerr, 1975; Boivie, 1979; Berkley, 1980; Burton and Craig,
1983; Mantyh, 1983; Apkarian and Hodge, 1989a-c; Gingold
et al., 1991). All of these agreeon the dissociated,clumped, or

archipelago-like nature of the terminations and show the existence of a significant concentration in the general region here
defined as the CO-weak cap of WM. Unfortunately, few previous accounts have been accompanied by photomicrographs
of the cytoarchitecture of the region, the location of the ter-

The Journal of Neuroscience,

minations usually being shown on drawings derived from Olszewski’s atlas (1952). In most cases, therefore, it is difficult to
correlate the localization pattern with the underlying cyto- and
chemoarchitecture revealed in the present study. Boivie (1979)
shows a photomicrograph in which the small-celled cap is clearly
revealed. This he designates the medial division of the posterior
group of nuclei (PO) by analogy with appearances in the cat.
Olszewski (1952) included a similar region in PLa. In the study
of Gingold et al. (199 l), a similar region is mainly incorporated
into VP1 and PO. Other studies, relying on atlas-based corre-

October

1992, fZ(10)

4105

lations, have located the posteromedial concentration in PLa,
in a more caudal PO or SG or in VPL itself.
According to Ralston and Ralston (1992), the dorsal component of the spinothalamic tract terminates selectively in this
caudal region. Past practice in this laboratory, following Olszewski, had been to designate the small-celled cap as part of
PLa (Jones, 1985), but the present investigation and that of
Rausell and Jones (199 1a,b) has led to a reevaluation. The COstaining pattern is particularly useful in delineating the cap. Even
when CO staining is weak, as in the small-celled matrix of VPM,

4106

Rausell et al.

l

Calbindin

and Parvalbumin

Cells in VPL

Figure 13. Sections from same brain as those shown in Figure 12 but at a more posterior level. A shows spinothalamic terminations anterogradely
labeled with HRP. The adjacent section (B) stained for CO activity shows that most of these terminations are in the posteriorcap (s).Arrows
indicate same blood vessels. For abbreviatons, see Appendix. Scale bar, 1 mm.

in the cap of VPM/VPL, and in PLa, there is still a degreeof
staining evident. Fiber laminae, by contrast, show no staining
at all. On this basis, it is possible sometimesto detect a fine
fiber lamina between PLa and the matrix of VPM anteriorly,
although this disappearsposteriorly. Distinguishingthe cap from
PLa posteriorly then dependsmainly on the slightly denserCO
staining and higher cell density in Nissl stainsof PLa (seeFig.
4). There is a CO-negative fiber lamina separatingVPM from
VPL anteriorly, but at the posterior pole of VPM where the COdenserods of VPM start to disappear,this lamina breaksdown
and the CO-weak, small-celledzonesof VPL and the expanding
matrix of VPM mergeto form the cap. For this reason,it seems
appropriate, provisionally, to consider the cap a part of the
ventral posterior nuclear complex.
An alternative viewpoint, previously expressedin reports describing studies on VPM (Rausell and Jones, 1991a,b), is to
view the small-celled, CO-weak matrix of VPM, the cap, and
CO-weak zones of VPL as part of a more widely distributed,
CO-weak region made up of smaller, calbindin-positive cells
that is unconstrained by nuclear borders and extends virtually
uninterruptedly from the posterior nucleus, through PLa, the
CO-weak matrix of VPM, the CO-weak zonesof VPL, and parts
of CL into the VLp nucleus.The attraction of this interpretation
is that this CO-weak, calbindin-rich region is virtually coextensive with the region of termination of the spinothalamic and
caudal trigeminothalamic pathways. Possibly this entire region
consistsof layer I-projecting cells, but data are only available
for the calbindin cells of VPM, VPL, and VLp. Although PLa
is known to project to area 2 of SI and to area 5 (Burton and
Jones, 1976; Joneset al., 1979; Pons and Kaas, 1985; Cusick

and Gould, 1990), terminations of its axons have previously
only been localized in layer III (Jonesand Burton, 1976).
An even more radical view that will require confirmation
would be to seethe small calbindin-positive cells as a diffuse,
layer I-projecting matrix of the entire thalamus upon which the
classicalnuclei, based upon cortical area-specific projections
and terminations of major afferent pathways, are superimposed.
The two subnuclei (VPL and VPM) of the primate ventral
posterior thalamic nucleusor ventrobasal complex, apart from
intrinsic GABAergic neurons (Penny et al., 1983; Jones and
Hendry, 1989; Benson et al., 1991; Hunt et al., 199l), appear
to be composedessentiallyof two principal populations of relay
neuronsthat selectively expresscalbindin or parvalbumin. The
small number of neurons that coexpressparvalbumin and calbindin await further detailed evaluation, as doesany potential
breakdown of the calbindin cellsinto calbindin- and calretinin(Jacobowitz and Winsky, 1991) containing types. The two major
populations now seemestablishedas having laminar-specific
projections to the somatosensorycortex-calbindin cellsto layer
I and parvalbumin cells to deeperlayers. Deeper-layer projections of calbindin cells cannot be ruled out: although labeling
of thesecellsafter deep injections could be due to involvement
of fibers passing through to layer I, it could also be due to
projections to the middle layers as well. In the matrix of VPM
and the posterior cap of VPWVPM, the layer I-projecting cells
are preferentially innervated by caudal trigeminothalamic and
spinothalamic fibers. The spinothalamic system therefore appearsto have preferential accessto superficial layers of the somatosensory cortex from these regions. Calbindin cells in the
remainder of VPL also project to layer I, and those situated in

The Journal of Neuroscience,

October

1992, 12(10)

4107

I Inn

E

Figure 14. A andB, The samepartsof adjacentsections
closeto the posteriorpoleof VPM, showingHRP-labeledspinotbalamic
terminalfiber
ramifications(A) andCO activity (B). Arrows indicatesamebloodvessels.
Labeledfiberramificationsareconcentrated
in CO-weakregions.C and
D, Fluorescence
micrographs
from the samemicroscopicfield of anotherbrain, showingFR fluorescence
in anterogradelylabeledspinothalamic
terminations(C) in a regionof ealbindin-immunoreactive
cells(0). Fibersarenot calbindinpositive.Arrows indicatesamebloodvessels.Scale
bars:A and B, 100flrn; C andD, 25 pm.

CO-weak, parvalbumin cell-negative zones may also be primarily innervated by spinothalamic fibers, but this is not yet
completely clear. Moreover, numerous layer I-projecting calbindin cells throughout VPL occupy parts of CO-rich regions
containing numerousparvalbumin cells, innervated by lemniscal terminations and into which spinothalamic fiber terminations can intrude. While in some regions of VPL, therefore,
layer I-projecting calbindin cells may receive a preponderance
of spinothalamicinputs, in the majority they are likely to receive
both spinothalamic and lemniscal terminals. A brief report of
electron microscopic observations by Ralston (199 1) indicates
the presenceof the two types of terminals on certain VPL neurons in the monkey.
The presenceof both overlap and selectivity in the terminations of spinothalamic afferents on thalamic cells is not surprising in view of the reports of single-unit investigations in

VPL. Most parent neurons of the spinothalamic tract in monkeys are nociceptive but include wide-dynamic-range neurons
that receive inputs from both nociccptors and low-threshold
mechanoreceptors,and neurons that receive nociceptive-specific inputs (Willis et al., 1974; Price et al., 1978; Chung et al.,
1979; Kenshalo et al., 1979; Surmeier et al., 1988). This is
reflected in the stimulus-responsecharacteristicsofnociceptive
thalamic neuronsin monkeys (Per1and Whitlock, 1961; Pollin
and Albe Fessard,1979; Kenshalo et al., 1980; Caseyand Morrow, 1983; Chung et al., 1986a,b).Neurons respondingto noxious thermal or mechanicalstimuli are greatly outnumbered by
those responding only to innocuous stimuli. Among those respondingto noxious stimuli, both wide-dynamic-rangeand highthreshold types are found. In the majority of cases,the nociceptive responsesdependupon pathwaysin the lateral funiculus
of the spinal cord (Chung et al., 1986b), suggestingspecificity

4108

Rausell

et al. * Calbindin

and

Parvalbumin

Cells

in VPL

of innervation of the majority of these thalamic cells by spinothalamic afferents. However, responses of some nociceptive
cells depend upon more dorsally situated spinal pathways (Chung
et al., 1986b), and certain studies suggest that both dorsal column and lateral quadrant pathways in the spinal cord can converge on single thalamic neurons (Per1 and Whitlock, 196 1).
Hence, a failure to detect a complete dissociation of spinothalamic terminations from CO-rich, lemniscal termination zones
in the core of VPL is probably not unexpected. No studies have
specifically reported on the responses of neurons in the VPM
matrix or the posterior VPWVPM cap, although Bushnell and
Duncan (1987) have indicated the presence of cells in VPM with
responses resembling those of superficial, caudal trigeminal neurons. A search for nociceptive responses in the matrix/map
region might be revealing, especially since the cap is continuous
with PO and is located in a region that suggests a correspondence
with regions of the human thalamus in which electrical stimulation elicits thermal or painful sensations (Hassler, 1959, 1970;
Halliday and Logue, 1972; Tasker et al., 1976, 1983; Lenz et
al., 1987, 1988a,b), and in which lesions may alleviate painful
states (Hassler and Reichert, 1959; Hassler, 1960). The cap also
shows enhanced calbindin immunoreactivity
in monkeys subjected to chronic dorsal rhizotomies leading to transneuronal
degeneration of the parvalbumin-containing
lemniscal system
(Rausell et al., 1992). This has led to the suggestion that levels
ofthe protein may be activity dependent, increasing in situations
associated with an imbalance in the activity ofthe spinothalamic
and lemniscal systems.
The projection of calbindin relay cells in VPL and VPM to
the most superficial layer or layers of the somatosensory cortex
suggests that input from these cells can potentially gain access
to large populations of cortical neurons situated in all layers,
since the pyramidal cells of layers II-VI have substantial dendritic ramifications in layer I of SI (Ramon y Cajal, 1899). A
population of layer I-III GABAergic neurons with strong vertical axonal connections to subjacent layers also has dendritic
access to layer I (DeFelipe et al., 1990). Hence, inputs to layer
I are in a potentially powerful position to modulate levels of
activity in all cortical layers.
Nociceptive-specific
and wide-dynamic-range
neurons have
been described in both the face and body representations in the
somatosensory cortex of anesthetized and conscious monkeys
(Kenshalo and Isensee, 1983; Kenshalo et al., 1988; Chudler et
al., 1990). The majority of nociceptive responsive cells were
located in layer IV in these studies, but responding cells were
also present in layers II-III and V. In general, the nociceptive
responsive cells tended to be mingled with low-threshold cells.
These responses are likely to be mediated by direct inputs to
layer IV instead of to layer I. Thus, if the layer I-projecting
calbindin system is associated with the central pain pathways,
its role may be part of an arousal system rather than one that
has the prime responsibility for the relay of information pertaining to the quality, intensity, and localization of a noxious
stimulus. The immunocytochemical characteristics of VPL nociceptive cells projecting to layer IV will be examined in future
investigations.
Parvalbumin immunoreactivity
defines the relay cells and
their axons at all levels of the dorsal column and trigeminallemniscal system in primates, being found in fibers of the dorsal
columns, in cells of the dorsal column and principal trigeminal
nuclei, in fibers of the medial lemniscus, and in the thalamic
cells among which these fibers terminate (Rausell and Jones,

199 la,b; Rausell et al., 1992). Calbindin immunoreactivity,
however, cannot be regarded as a similar generic marker for the
spinothalamic system. Although expressed in many cells in the
marginal zone and substantia gelatinosa of the dorsal horn of
primates (Fournet et al., 1986; Rausell et al., 1992) and other
species (Celio, 1990), the cell distribution is not coextensive
with the distribution of the cells of origin of the spinothalamic
tract in primates (Albe-Fessard et al., 1974; Trevino and Carstens, 1975; Willis et al., 1979; Hayes and Rustioni, 1980; Apkarian and Hodge, 1989a,b). Moreover, it was not possible to
identify calbindin-immunoreactive,
FB-labeled spinothalamic
fibers entering the thalamus in the present study, and a search
for calbindin-immunoreactive
dorsal horn cells retrogradely
labeled with FB in the same animals was negative (E. Rausell
and E. G. Jones, unpublished observations).
The functions of the calcium-binding proteins in neurons remain largely unknown. Earlier correlations with the buffering
of calcium associated with the fast spiking behavior of certain
neuronal populations and a specific localization in GABAergic
neurons (Celio, 1986; Kawaguchi et al., 1987; Kosaka et al.,
1987) did not reveal the full picture, There are substantial regional and species differences in the association with GABA
cells and in the differential expression of calbindin or parvalbumin. For example, in the cerebral cortex of all species examined, parvalbumin immunoreactivity
is found in one population of GABA cells while calbindin immunoreactivity is found
in a second population of GABA cells and in certain pyramidal
cells (Hendry et al., 1989; Demeulemeester et al., 1991; DeFelipe and Jones, 1992). In the thalamus of all species, parvalbumin colocalizes with GABA immunoreactivity in the reticular
nucleus (Jones and Hendry, 1989). In the dorsal thalamus, however, parvalbumin is specifically associated with intrinsic GABA
cells in cats (Stichel et al., 1988), while neither calcium-binding
protein is found to a significant extent in intrinsic GABA neurons of the monkey (Jones and Hendry, 1989). At the present
time, the calcium-binding proteins are useful markers for cell
identity, for nuclear delineations and for patterns of connectivity, but determining their different functions, if any, remains a
challenge.
Appendix

List of anatomical abbreviations
CL
CM
LP
MG
PLa
PO
R
SG
La
VLP

VMb
VP1
VPL
VPM

Central lateral nucleus
Centre median nucleus
Lateral posterior nucleus
Medial geniculate nucleus
Anterior pulvinar nucleus
Posterior nucleus
Reticular nucleus
Suprageniculate nucleus
Small-celled, CO-weak region
Ventral lateral anterior nucleus
Ventral lateral posterior nucleus
Basal ventral medial nucleus
Ventral posterior inferior nucleus
Ventral posterior lateral nucleus
Ventral posterior medial nucleus

References
Albe-Fessard D, Levante A, Lamour Y (1974) Origin ofspinothalamic
tract in monkeys. Brain Res 6.5:503-509.
Apkarian AV, Hbdge CJ (1989a) The primate spinothalamic pathways: I. A quantitative study ofthe cells oforigin ofthe spinothalamic
pathway. J Comp Neural 288:447-473.

The Journal of Neuroscience,

Apkarian AV, Hodge CJ (1989b) The primate spinothalamic pathways: II. The cells of origin of the dorsolateral and ventral spinothalamic pathways. J Comp Neurol 288:474-492.
Apkarian AV, Hodge CJ (1989~) The primate spinothalamic pathways: III. Thalamic terminations of the dorsolateral and ventral spinothalamic pathways. J Comp Nemo1 288:493-5 11.
Applebaum AE, Leonard RB, Kenshalo DR, Martin RF, Willis WD
(1979) Nuclei in which functionally identified spinothalamic tract
neurons terminate. J Comp Neurol 188:575-586.
Asanuma C, Thach WT, Jones EG (1983) Distribution of cerebellar
terminations and their relation to other afferent termination in the
ventral lateral thalamic region of the monkey. Brain Res Rev 5:237265.
Avendaiio C, Stepniewska I, Rausell E, Reinoso-Suarez F (1990) Segregation and heterogeneity of thalamic cell populations projecting to
superficial layers of posterior parietal cortex: a retrograde tracer study
in cat and monkey. Neuroscience 39:547-560.
Benson DL, Isackson PJ, Hendry SHC, Jones EG (199 1) Differential
gene expression for glutamic acid decarboxylase and type II calciumcalmodulin-dependent
protein kinase in basal ganglia, thalamus and
hypothalamus-of the monkey. J Neurosci 11: 1540-1564.
Berklev K (1980) Snatial relationshins between the termination of
somatic sensory and motor pathways-in the rostra1 brainstem of cats
and monkeys: I. Ascending somatic sensory inputs to lateral diencephalon. J Comp Neurol 193:283-3 17.
Bimbacher D, Albus K (1987) Divergence of single axons in afferent
projections to the cat’s visual cortex. J Comp Neurol 26 1:543-56 1.
Boivie J (1978) Anatomical observations on the dorsal column nuclei,
their thalamic projection and the cytoarchitecture of some somatosensory thalamic nuclei in the monkey. J Comp Neurol 178: 17-48.
Boivie J (1979) An anatomical reinvestigation of the termination of
the spinothalamic tract in the monkey. J Comp Neurol 186:343-370.
Bowsher D (196 1) The termination of secondary somatosensory neurons within the thalamus of Mucaca mulatta: an experimental degeneration study. J Comp Neurol 117:2 13-227.
Burton H, Craig AD (1983) Spinothalamic projections in cat, raccoon
and monkey: a study based on anterograde transport of horseradish
peroxidase. In: Somatosensory integration in the thalamus (Macchi
G, Rustioni A, Spreafico A, eds), pp l-25. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Burton H, Jones EG (1976) The posterior thalamic region and its
cortical projection in new world and old world monkeys. J Comp
Neurol 168:249-302.
Bushnell MC, Duncan GH (1987) Mechanical response properties of
ventroposterior medial thalamic neurons in the alert monkey. Exp
Brain Res 67:603-614.
Casey KL, Morrow TJ (1983) Ventral posterior thalamic neurons
differentially responsive to noxious stimulation ofthe awake monkey.
Science 221~675-677.
Celio MR (1986) Parvalbumin in most y-aminobutyric acid-containing neurons of the rat cerebral cortex. Science 23 1:995-997.
Celio MR (1990) Calbindin D-28k and parvalbumin in the rat nervous
system. Neuroscience 35:375-475.
Chudler EH, Anton F, Dubner R, Kenshalo DR Jr (1990) Responses
of nociceptive SI neurons in monkeys and pain sensation in humans
elicited by noxious thermal stimulation: effect of interstimulus interval. J Neurophysiol 63:559-569.
Chung JM, Kenshalo DR Jr, Gerhart KD, Willis WD (1979) Excitation
of primate spinothalamic neurons by cutaneous C-fiber volleys. J
Neurophysiol 42: 1354-1369.
Chung JM, Surmeier DJ, Lee KH, Sorkin LS, Honda CN, Tsong Y,
Willis WD (1986a) Classification of primate spinothalamic and somatosensory thalamic neurons based on cluster analysis. J Neurophysiol 56:308-327.
Chung JM, Lee KH, Surmeier DJ, Sorkin LS, Kim J, Willis WD (1986b)
Response characteristics of neurons in the ventral posterior lateral
nucleus of the monkev thalamus. J Neuroohvsiol 56:370-390.
Cleland BG, Dubin MW, Levick WR (197 1) Sustained and transient
neurones in the cat’s retina and lateral geniculate nucleus. J Physiol
(Lond) 217~473-496.
Cusick CG, Gould HJ III (1990) Connections between area 3b of the
somatosensory cortex and subdivisions of the ventroposterior nuclear
complex and the anterior pulvinar nucleus in squirrel monkeys. J
Comp Neurol 292:83-102.
DeFelipe J, Hendry SHC, Hashikawa T, Molinari M, Jones EG (1990)
A microcolumnar structure of monkey cerebral cortex revealed by

October

1992, 12(10)

4109

immunocytochemical studies of double bouquet cell axons. Neuroscience 37~655-673.
DeFelipe J, Jones EG (1992) High-resolution light and electron microscopic immunocytochemistry of colocalized GABA and calbindin
D-28k in somata and double bouquet cell axons of monkey somatosensory cortex. Eur J Neurosci 4:46-60.
DeHoff RI, Rhines FN (196 1) Determination of the number of particles per unit volume from measurements made on random plane
sections: the general cylinder and the ellipsoid. Trans Amer Inst Metall 221:975-982.
Demeulemeester H, Arckens L, Vandesande F, Orban GA, Heizmann
CW, Pochet R (199 1) Calcium binding proteins as molecular markers for cat geniculate neurons. Exp Brain Res 83:5 13-520.
Foumet N, Garcia-Segura LM, Norman AW, Orci L (1986) Selective
localization of calcium-binding protein in human brainstem, cerebellum and spinal cord. Brain Res 399:3 10-3 16.
Friedlander MJ, Lin GS, Stanford LR, Sherman SM (198 1) Morphology of functionally identified neurons in the lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat. J Neurophysiol 46:80-129.
Gingold SI, Greenspan JD, Apkarian A (199 1) Anatomic evidence of
nociceptive inputs to primary somatosensory cortex: relationship between spinothalamic terminals and thalamocortical cells in squirrel
monkeys. J Comp Neurol 308:467-190.
Gordon GG, Manson JR (1967) Cutaneous receptive fields of single
nerve cells in the thalamus of the cat. Nature 2 15:597-599.
Halliday AM, Logue V (1972) Painful sensations evoked by electrical
stimulation in-the thalamus. In: Neurophysiology studied in man
(Somien GG. ed). DD 22 l-230. Amsterdam: Excernta Medica.
Hashikawa T, RauseilE, Molinari M, Jones EG (1991) Parvalbuminand calbindin-containing
neurons in the monkey medial geniculate
complex: differential distribution and cortical layer specific projections. Brain Res 544:335-34 1.
Hassler R (1959) Anatomy of the thalamus. In: Introduction to stereotaxis with an atlas of the human brain (Schaltenbrand G, Bailey P,
eds), pp 230-290. Stuttgart: Thieme.
Hassler R (1960) Die zentralen System des Schmerzes. Acta Neurochir
8:353423.
Hassler R (1970) Dichotomy of facial pain conduction in the diencephalon. In: Trigeminal neuralgia (Hassler R, Walker AE, eds), pp
123-l 38. Stuttgart: Thieme
Hassler R, Riechert T (1959) Klinische und anatomische Befunde bei
stereotaktischen Schmerzoperationen
im Thalamus. Arch Psychiat
Nervenkr 200:93-122.
Hayes NL, Rustioni A (1980) Spinothalamic and spinomedullary neurons in macaques: a single and double retrograde tracer study. Neuroscience 5:86 l-874.
Hendry SHC, Jones EG, Hockfield S, McKay RDG (1988) FBNeuronal populations stained with the monoclonal antibody Cat-30 1 in
the mammalian cerebral cortex and thalamus. J Neurosci 8:5 18-542.
Hendry SHC, Jones EG, Emson PC, Lawson DEM, Heizmann CW,
Streit P (1989) Two classes of cortical GABA neurons defined by
differential calcium binding protein immunoreactivities. Exp Brain
Res 76~467472.
Herkenham M (1986) New perspectives on the organization of nonspecific thalamocortical projections. In: Cerebral cortex, Vol 5, Sensory-motor areas and aspects of cortical connectivity (Jones EG, Peters A, eds), pp 403-446. New York: Plenum.
Hockfield S, Sur M (1990) Monoclonal antibody: Cat 301 identifies
Y-cells in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. J Comp
Neurol 300:320-330.
Hunt CA, Pang DZ, Jones EG (199 1) IbDistribution and density of
GABA cells in intralaminar and adjacent nuclei of monkey thalamus.
Neuroscience 43: 185-196.
Jacobowitz DM, Winsky L (199 1) Immunocytochemical localization
of calretinin in the forebrain of the rat. J Comp Neurol304: 198-2 18.
Jones EG (1985) The thalamus. New York: Plenum.
Jones EG, Burton H (1976) Area1 differences in the laminar distribution of thalamic afferents in cortical fields of the insular, parietal
and temporal regions of primates. J Comp Neurol 168: 197-248.
Jones EG, Friedman DP (1982) Projection pattern of functional components of thalamic ventrobasal complex on monkey somatosensory
cortex. J Neurophysiol48:521-544.
Jones EG, Hendry SHC (1989) Differential calcium binding protein
immunoreactivity distinguishes classes of relay neurons in monkey
thalamic nuclei. Eur J Neurosci 1:222-246.

41 10

Rausell

et al. - Calbindin

and

Parvalbumin

Cells

in VPL

Jones EG, Wise SP, Coulter JD (1979) Differential thalamic relattonships of sensory-motor and parietal cortical fields in monkeys. J Comp
Nemo1 183833-882.
Jones EG. Friedman DP. Hendrv SHC (1982) Thalamic basis of place
and modality-specific columns in monkey somatosensory cortex: a
correlative anatomical and physiological study. J Neurophysiol 48:
545-568.
Jones EG, Hendry SHC, Brandon C (1986a) Cytochrome oxidase
staining reveals functional organization of monkey somatosensory
thalamus. Exp Brain Res 62:438442.
Jones EG, Schwark HD, Callahan PJ (1986b) Extent of the ipsilateral
representation in the ventral posterior medial nucleus of the monkey
thalamus. Exp Brain Res 63:3 10-320.
Kaas JH. Nelson Rl. Sur M. Dvkes RW. Merzenich MM (1984) The
somatotopic organization of: the ventroposterior thalamus of the
squirrel monkey Suimiri sciureus. J Comp Neurol226:ll
l-140.
Kaske A, Dick A, Creutzfeldt OD (1991) The local domain for divergence of subcortical afferents to the striate and extrastriate visual
cortex in the common marmoset (Cdithrix @&.&: a multiple labelling study. Exp Brain Res 84:254-265.
Kawaguchi Y, Katsumaru H, Kosaka T, Heizmann CW, Hama K (1987)
Fast spiking cells in rat hippocampus (CA1 region) contain the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin. Brain Res 4 16:369-374.
Kenshalo DR, Isensee 0 (1983) Responses of primate SI cortical neurons to noxious stimuli. J Neuroohvsiol 50:1479-1496.
Kenshalo DR, Leonard RB, ChungJM, Willis WD (1979) Responses
of primate spinothalamic neurons to graded and to repeated noxious
heat stimuli. J Neuroohvsiol 42: 1370-1389.
Kenshalo DR Jr, Giesler GJ Jr, Leonard RB, Willis WD (1980) Responses of neurons in primate ventral posterior lateral nucleus to
noxious stimuli. J Neurophysio143: 1594-l 6 14.
Kenshalo DR, Chudler EH, Anton F, Dubner R (1988) SI nociceptive
neurons participate in the encoding process by which monkeys perceive the intensity of noxious thermal stimulation. Brain Res 454:
378-382.
Kerr FWL (1975) The ventral spinothalamic tract and other ascending
systems of the ventral funiculus of the spinal cord. J Comp Neurol
159:335-356.
Kerr FWL, Lippman HH (1974) The primate spinothalamic tract as
demonstrated by anterolateral cordotomy and commissural myelotomy. In: Advances in neurology (Bonica JJ, ed), pp 147-156. New
York: Raven.
Kosaka T, Katsumaru H, Hama K, Wu J-Y, Heizmann CW (1987)
GABAergic neurons containing the Ca*+-binding protein parvalbumin in the rat hippocampus and dentate gyrus. Brain Res 419: 119130.
LeGros Clark WE (1932) The structure and connections of the thalamus. Brain 55:406-470.
Lenz FA, Tasker RR, Dostrovsky JO, Kwan HC, Gore&i J, Hirayama
T, Murphy JT (1987) Abnormal single-unit activity recorded in the
somatosensory thalamus of a quadriplegic patient with central pain.
Pain 31:225-236.
Lenz FA, Dostrovsky JO, Tasker RR, Yamashiro K, Kwan HC, Murphy
JT (1988a) Single-unit analysis of the human ventral thalamic nuclear group: somatosensory responses. J Neurophysiol 59:299-3 16.
Lenz FA, Tasker RR, Dostrovsky JO, Kwan HC, Gore&i J, Hirayama
T, Murphy JT (1988b) Abnormal single-unit activity and responses
to stimulation in the presumed ventrocaudal nucleus of patients with
central pain. In: Proceedings of the Vth World Congress on Pain
(Gebhardt GF, Bond MR, Dubner R, eds), pp 157-164. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Macchi G (1988) Thalamic entities and the problem ofthalamocortical
integration. In: Cellular thalamic mechanisms (Bentivoglio M, Spreafice R, eds), pp 569-588. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Macchi G. Bentivoelio M. Molinari M. Minciacchi D (1984) The
thalamocaudate versus thalamo-cortical projections as studied in the
cat with fluorescent retrograde double labeling. Exp Brain Res 54:
225-239.
Mantyh PW (1983) The spinothalamic tract in the primate: a reexamination using wheatgerm agglutinin conjugated to horseradish
peroxidase. Neuroscience 9:847-862.
Mehler WR (1969) Some neurological species differences; a posteriori.
Ann NY Acad Sci 167:424-468.
Mehler WR, Feferman ME, Nauta WJ (1960) Ascending axon degeneration following anterolateral cordotomy: experimental study in the
monkey. Brain 83:7 18-750.

Mesulam M-M (1978) Tetramethylbenzidine
for horseradish peroxidase neurohistochemistry: a non-carcinogenic blue reaction product
with superior sensitivity for visualizing neural afferent and efferents.
J Histochem Cytochem 26: 106-l 17.
Minciacchi D, Bentivoglio M, Molinari M, Kultas-Ilinsky K, Ilinsky
IA, Macchi G (1986) Multiple cortical targets of one thalamic nucleus: the projections of the ventral medial nucleus in the cat studied
with retrograde tracers. J Comp Neuro1252: 106-129.
Montero VM, Zempel J (1986) The proportion and size of GABAimmunoreactive neurons in the magnocellular and parvocellular layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus of the rhesus monkey. Exp Brain
Res 62~2 15-223.
Morel A, Imig TJ (1987) Thalamic projections to fields A, AI, P and
VP in the cat auditory cortex. J Comp Neuro1265: 119-144.
Mountcastle VB, Henneman N (1952) The representation of tactile
sensibility in the thalamus of the monkey. J Comp Neurol 97:409440.
Mountcastle VB, Poggio GF (1963) The functional properties of ventrobasal thalamic neurons studied in unanesthetized monkeys. J Neurophysiol 26:775-806.
Olszewski J (1952) The thalamus of the Mucacu mulutta.An atlas for
use with the stereotaxic instrument. New York: Karger.
Penny GR, Itoh K, Diamond IT (1982) Cells of different sizes in the
ventral nuclei project to different layers of the somatic cortex in the
cat. Brain Res 242~55-66.
Penny GR, Fitzpatrick D, Schmechel DE, Diamond IT (1983) Glutamic acid decarboxylase-immunoreactive
neurons and horseradish
peroxidase-labeled projection neurons in the ventral posterior nucleus
of the cat and Galago senegulensis. J Neurosci 3: 1868-1887.
Per1 ER, Whitlock DG (196 1) Somatic stimuli exciting spinothalamic
projections to thalamic neurons in cat and monkey. Exp Neurol 3:
256-296.
Pollin B, Albe-Fessard D (1979) Organization of somatic thalamus in
monkeys with and without section of dorsal spinal tracts. Brain Res
173:431-449.
Pons TP, Kaas JH (1985) Connections of area 2 of somatosensory
cortex with the anterior pulvinar and subdivisions of the ventroposterior complex in macaque monkeys. J Comp Neurol240: 16-36.
Price DD, Hayes RL, Ruda M, Dubner R (1978) Spatial and temporal
transformations of input to spinothalamic tract neurons and their
relation to somatic sensations. J Neurophysiol 41:933-947.
Ralston HJ III (1969) The synaptic organization of lemniscal projections to the ventrobasal thalamus in the cat. Brain Res 14:99-l 16.
Ralston HJ III (1991) Local circuitrv of the somatosensorv thalamus
in the processing of sensory information. In: Progress in brain research, Vol87, Role of the forebrain in sensation and behavior (Holstege G, ed), pp 13-28. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Ralston HJ, Ralston DD (1992) The primate dorsal spinothalamic
tract: evidence for a specific termination in the posterior nuclei (PO/
SG) of the thalamus. Pain 48:107-l 18.
Ram6n y Cajal S (1899) Estudios sobre la corteza cerebral humana.
II: Estructura de la corteza motriz de1 hombre y mamiferos superiores.
Rev Trim Micrograf 4: 117-200.
Rausell E, Avendaiio C (1985) Thalamocortical neurons projecting to
superficial and to deep layers in parietal, frontal and prefrontal regions
in the cat. Brain Res 347:159-165.
Rausell E, Jones EG (199 la) Histochemical and immunocytochemical
compartments of the thalamic VPM nucleus in monkeys and their
relationship to the representational map. J Neurosci 11:210-225.
Rausell E, Jones EG (199 1b) Chemically distinct compartments of the
thalamic VPM nucleus in monkeys relay principal and spinal trigeminal pathways to different layers of the somatosensory cortex. J Neurosci 111226-237.
Rausell E, Bae C-S, Cusick CG, Jones EG (1991) Chemical compartments in VPL nucleus of monkey thalamus. Sot Neurosci Abstr 17:
625.
Rausell E, Cusick CG, Taub E, Jones EG (1992) Chronic deafferentation in monkeys differentially affects nociceptive and nonnociceptive pathways distinguished by specific calcium-binding proteins and
down-regulates y-aminobutyric acid type A receptors at thalamic levels. Proc Nat1 Acad Sci USA 89:2571-2575.
Rogers JH (1987) Calretinin: a gene for a novel calcium-binding protein expressed principally in neurons. J Cell Biol 105: 1343-1353.
Stanford LR, Friedlander MJ, Sherman SM (1983) Morphological and
physiological properties of geniculate W-cells in the cat. J Neurophysiol 50:582-608.

The Journal

Stichel CC, Singer W, Heizmann CW (1988) Light and electron microscopic immunocytochemical
localization of parvalhumin in the
dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat: evidence of co-existence
with GABA. J Comp Neurol 26829-37.
Surmeier DJ, Honda CN, Willis WD (1988) Natural groupings of
primate spinothalamic neurons based on cutaneous stimulation.
Physiological and anatomical features. J Neurophysiol 59:833-860.
Tasker RR, Organ LW, Rowe IH, Hawrylyshyn P (1976) Human
spinothalamic tract-stimulation mapping in the spinal cord and brainstem. Adv Pain Res Ther 1:25 l-257.
Tasker RR, Tsuda T, Hawrylyshyn P (1983) Clinical neurophysiological investigation of deafferentation pain. Adv Pain Res Ther 5:
713-738.
Tracey DJ, Asanuma C, Jones EG, Porter R (1980) Thalamic relay
to motor cortex: afferent pathways from brainstem. cerebellum and
spinal cord in monkeys J Neurophysiol44:532-554.
Trevino DL, Carstens E (1975) Confirmation of the location of spinothalamic neurons in the cat and monkey by retrograde transport
of horseradish peroxidase. Brain Res 98: 177-l 82.

of Neuroscience,

October

1992,

72(10)

4111

Walker AE (1938) The primate thalamus. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Wiener SI, Johnson JI, Ostapoff EM (1987) Demarcations of the
mechanosensory projection zones in the raccoon thalamus, shown by
cytochrome oxidase, acetylcholinesterase, and Nissl stains. J Comp
Neurol 258:509-526.
Willis WD, Trevino DL, Coulter JD, Maunz RA (1974) Responses
of primate spinothalamic tract neurons to natural stimulation of hindlimb. J Neurophysiol 37:358-372.
Willis WD, Kenshalo DR Jr, Leonard RB (1979) The cells of origin
of the primate spinothalamic tract. J Comp Neurol 188:543-574.
Wong-Riley M (1979) Changes in the visual system of monocularly
sutured or enucleated cats demonstrable with cytochrome oxidase
histochemistry. Brain Res 17 1: 1 l-28.
Yen C-T, Conley M, Jones EG (1985) Morphologic and functional
types of neurons in cat ventral posterior thalamic nucleus. J Neurosci
5:1316-1338.

