JOURNALOF NEUROPHYSIOLOGY
Vol. 68, No. 4, October 1992. Printed

in U.S.A.

A Model of the Electrophysiological Properties
of Thalamocortical Relay Neurons
DAVID A. MCCORMICK
AND JOHN R. HUGUENARD
Section ofNeurobiology,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06.510; and
Department ofNeurology, Stanford University Medical School, Stanford, California 94305
6. Addition of the hyperpolarization
activated cation current &
resulted in a depolarizing
sag on hyperpolarization
and generated
an apparent afterhyperpolarization
after a low-threshold
Ca 2+
1. A model of the electrophysiological
properties of single thalspike.
During
the
generation
of
a
low-threshold
Ca2+
spike,
&
amocortical relay neurons in the rodent and cat dorsal lateral gedeactivated, resulting in the membrane potential’s falling to a
niculate nucleus was constructed, based in part on the voltage
more negative level on repolarization
of the Ca2+ spike. Subsedependence and kinetics of ionic currents detailed with voltageof the membrane
clamp techniques. The model made the simplifying assumption of quent activation of & resulted in repolarization
potential
and
therefore
the
appearance
of
an
afterhyperpolarizaa single uniform compartment
and incorporated
a fast and trantion.
sient Na+ current, &,; a persistent, depolarization-activated
Na’
7. Rhythmic low-threshold
Ca2+ spikes and burst generation
current, INap; a low-threshold
Ca2+ current, &; a high-threshold
were successfully modeled and depended critically on Jr, &, and
Ca2+ current, I,; a Ca2+ -activated K+ current, Ic; a transient and
the leak currents Imeak and INaleak. The frequency and amplitude of
depolarization-activated
K+ current, 1*; a slowly inactivating and
rhythmic Ca2+ spike generation was strongly modulated by the
depolarization-activated
K+ current, 1= ; a hyperpolarization-acamplitude
of &, IT, and IUeak. Increasing the maximal conductivated cation current, &; and KC and Na+ leak currents JKleak
tance of g, resulted in an increase in rhythmic burst generation
and hileak *
from 0.5 to a maximum of 4 Hz. Shifting the voltage dependence
2. The effects of the various ionic currents on the electrophysioof & by it 10 mV resulted in an increase and decrease, respectively,
logical properties of thalamocortical
relay neurons were initially
of the frequency of rhythmic Ca2+ spike generation and a decrease
investigated through examining the effect of each current individuand increase, respectively, of the ability of the cell to maintain
ally on passive membrane responses. The two leak currents, JKleak rhythmic oscillation.
and &weak 7 determined in large part the resting membrane poten8. The response of the model to depolarizing
inputs was marktial and the apparent input resistance of the model neuron. Addiedly different during rhythmic oscillation than during tonic depotion of 1* resulted in a delay in the response of the model cell to a larization.
During rhythmic
oscillation,
depolarization
of the
depolarizing
current pulse, whereas addition of 1=, or IL commodel cell resulted in a transient burst response and disruption of
bined with I,, resulted in a marked and prolonged decrease in the rhythmic burst discharges, whereas application of the same deporesponse to depolarization.
Addition of 1h resulted in a depolarizlarizing current pulse in the tonic firing mode resulted in a train of
ing “sag” in response to hyperpolarization,
whereas addition of &
action potentials that displayed no spike frequency adaptation.
resulted in a large rebound Ca2+ spike after hyperpolarization.
9. In summary, the present model of thalamocortical
relay cells
Finally, addition of INap resulted in enhancement
of depolarizasuggests that the various K+ currents in these neurons contribute
tion.
to the repolarization
of not only Na+ but also low-threshold
Ca2+
3. The low-threshold
Ca2+ spike of rodent neurons was sucspikes,
control
the
temporal
characteristics
of
repetitive
firing,
and
cessfully modeled with the active currents JT, IL, 1*, I,, and &.
generate
an
apparent
rectification
of
the
neuron
at
resting
memThe low-threshold
Ca2+ current &- generated the low-threshold
brane potentials. The ionic currents & and & are critically inCa2’ spike. The transient K+ current 1* slowed the rate of rise and
volved in rhythmic low-threshold
Ca2+ spike generation, which
reduced the peak amplitude
of the low-threshold
Ca2+ spike,
also depends critically on the status of the various “leak” conducwhereas the slowly inactivating K+ current JK2 contributed greatly
tances that determine the membrane potential and apparent input
to the repolarization
of the Ca2+ spike. Activation of IL during the
resistance of the cell. These findings confirm and extend previous
peak of the Ca2+ spike led to activation of Ic, which also contribsuggestions based on intracellular
recordings of thalamocortical
uted to the repolarization
of the Ca2+ spike. Reduction of any one
relay cells obtained in vivo and in vitro.
of the K+ currents resulted in an increase in the other two, thereby
resulting in substantially smaller changes in the Ca2+ spike than
would be expected on the basis of the amplitude of each ionic
INTRODUCTION
current alone.
4. Activation of the various K+ currents, 1*, 1=, and &, also
In the accompanying paper (Huguenard and McCorresulted in apparent rectification of the model neuron such that
mick 1992)) we presented mathematical models of the voltthe response to a depolarizing
current pulse was substantially
age dependence and kinetics of several ionic currents pressmaller than the response to a hyperpolarizing
current pulse.
ent
in rodent thalamocortical
relay cells including the low5. Fast, Na+ -dependent
action potentials were repolarized
threshold
Ca2+
current,
IT;
the
hyperpolarization-activated
largely by 1c at membrane potentials positive to -60 mV, with
cation
current,
1h
;
the
transient,
depolarization-activated
smaller contributions
by 1* and 1=. In contrast, 1* and 1= formed
a major component of the ionic currents flowing in between ac- K+ current, 1*; and the slowly inactivating, depolarizationactivated K+ current, &. In this paper, we utilize these
tion potentials and therefore slowed the rate of action potential
generation.
mathematical
models, plus those developed by others
SUMMARY

1384

AND

CONCLUSIONS

0022-3077/92 $2.00 Copyright 0 1992 The American Physiological Society

CURRENT

CLAMP

MODEL

(French et al. 1990; Kay and Wong 1987; Yamada et al.
1989 ) , in an attempt to model the basic electrophysiological properties of single thalamocortical
relay neurons.
Rodent thalamocortical
relay cells have the interesting
property of being able to generate action potentials in either
of two modes, both in vivo and in vitro: 1) single spike, or
tonic, firing in which action potentials are generated one at
a time in trains and 2) burst firing in which the cell generates a rebound high-frequency burst of action potentials
after a brief hyperpolarization
generated either by a hyperpolarizing current pulse or by an inhibitory postsynaptic
potential. These unique electrophysiological
features of individual thalamocortical
relay neurons have been proposed
to be critical to the appearance of rhythmic oscillations in
intrathalamic
and thalamocortical
circuits (Deschenes et
al. 1984; Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a,b; reviewed by Steriade
and Deschenes 1984; Steriade and Llinas 1988 j. Indeed,
recently it has been demonstrated that even individual thalamocortical relay cells in the feline thalamus can maintain
rhythmic Ca 2-t spike-mediated burst activity when isolated
in vitro (McCormick
and Prince 1987; McCormick
and
Pape 1990a; Soltesz et al. 199 1). The generation of this
slow (OS-4 Hz) oscillation was proposed to be due largely
to the interaction of two currents: the low-threshold Ca2+
current l,r and the hyperpolarization-activated
cation
current I, (McCormick
and Pape 1990a).
One test of the various hypotheses concerning the contribution of the various ionic currents present in thalamocortical relay cells to their electrophysiological
properties is the
success with which an accurate mathematical model of the
properties of these different currents is able to reconstruct
the electrophysiological
behavior of the neuron. In addition, mathematical models of neurons are valuable, for they
allow the plotting of the amplitude and time course of each
of the different ionic currents during electrical activity in
the model neuron, as well as the easy examination of the
possible effects of the alteration in the amplitude or properties of each ionic current on the electrophysiological behavior of the neuron.
In this model we demonstrate that the various K+
currents present in thalamic relay cells are likely to contribute to the repolarization of both Na+ and low-threshol‘d
Ca2+ -mediated action potentials and control the frequency
and time course of repetitive firing. In addition, this model
confirms and extends the suggestion that rhythmic Ca2+
spike generation depends critically on the interaction of &
and & as well as on the status of K+ currents active at rest.
METHODS

This model of thalamocortical
relay cells was based on the mathematical description of &, 1*, IU, and & presented in the accompanying paper (Huguenard and McCormick
1992). In addition to
these currents, thalamocortical
relay cells are also known to possess a fast and transient Na+ current, a persistent Na+ current, a
Ca2+-activated
K+ current, and a high-threshold
Ca2’ current
(Coulter et al. 1989; Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a,b; McCormick,
unpublished
observations).
The mathematical
model of the fast
Na+ current was based on whole cell voltage-clamp recording obtained from acutely dissociated cortical pyramidal cells (Huguenard et al. 1988 ) and is presented in the APPENDIX.
The mathematical model of the persistent Na+ current was based on the data of
French et al. ( 1990) obtained from hippocampal
pyramidal cells;

OF

THALAMIC

NEURONS

1385

the model of the Ca2+ -activated K+ current was that of Yamada et
al. ( 1989), derived from bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cells; and
the model of the high-threshold
Ca2’ current Ii- was that of Kay
and Wong ( 1987)) based on data obtained from hippocampal
pyramidal cells. Although it is likely that there are differences
between these ionic currents of hippocampal,
cortical, and sympathetic ganglion cells and those of thalamocortical
relay cells, the
inclusion of these currents in the present model was necessary to
increase the accuracy of the emulation of the current-clamp
behavior of thalamocortical
relay neurons.
This model is a “point” or single compartment
model in which
all of the membrane behaves in unison. Although this is an obvious gross simplification
of the complicated morphology of thalamocortical relay neurons (e.g., see Bloomfield et al. 1987; Sherman and Koch 1986)) it was considered necessary because the
spatial distributions
of the various ionic currents are not known.
When they become available, these spatial data can be incorporated into future versions of this model. In addition, the success of
this “point”
model in replicating the basic electrophysiological
properties of thalamocortical
relay neurons suggests that the modeling of the complicated dendritic morphology of these cells is not
essential to the modeling of some of their basic electrophysiological features. Second, the dynamics of Ca2+ buffering in thalamocortical relay neurons are not known. In this model, we assumed a
single exponential decay of [ Ca2+li in the inner 100 nm of space
just beneath the supposed membrane. The time constant of this
decay was adjusted to replicate the duration of afterhyperpolarizations ( ~60 ms) that occur after the generation of a single action
potential (Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a,b).
The total membrane area in this model was assumed to be
29,000 pm2, which is in the range of feline thalamocortical
relay
cells (Bloomfield
et al. 1987). Given a specific membrane capacitance of 1 pF/cm2, this yields an input capacitance of 0.29 nF.
This value is within the range of input capacitances for feline thalamocortical
relay cells in slices in vitro as measured by the response to small hyperpolarizing
current pulses (0.15-0.8
nF;
McCormick,
unpublished
observations).
The maximal conductances of the various ionic currents were estimated by scaling the
normalized
conductance
(nS /pF) from the data obtained by
whole cell recording in dissociated thalamocortical
relay neurons
to that used here (0.29 nF; Table 1). The maximal conductance of
1h ( lo-30 nS) was based on voltage-clamp data obtained in thalamocortical neurons maintained as a slice, in vitro (McCormick
and Pape 1990a).
The temperature used in the present model was set to 35.5 “C,
because this is the temperature at which the intracellular
recordings from thalamocortical
relay cells maintained
in slices were
obtained (e.g., McCormick
and Pape 1990a). The kinetics of all
currents, except &- where it has been directly measured, were assumed to have a Qlo of 3. The extracellular concentration
of Ca2’
used in slice experiments was 2.0 mM and therefore was adopted
here in an attempt to model results obtained from intracellular
recordings in slices. In accordance with this change in [ Ca2+], ,
and the resultant changes in screening charge, the voltage dependence of activation and inactivation of & was adjusted so that the
values used for vi,, in the Bolzmann
equation were -60.5 mV
(activation)
and -84 mV (inactivation).
Numeric solution of the differential equations representing the
kinetics of the different ionic currents was achieved for this paper
by use of the fourth-order Runge-Kutta
method. The time step of
simulation continually varied, depending on the rate of change of
the various ionic gates. For these simulations, the total change in
ionic gates was limited to < 1YO during any particular time step. For
preliminary
results, a one- or two-step Euler integration method
was used and was found to yield similar or identical results to the
Runge-Kutta
method while greatly increasing the speed of simulation. The simulation program was written for use on an IBM AT-

1386
TABLE

D. A. MCCORMICK
1.

Maximal

AND

J. R. HUGUENARD

conductances for isolated and model cells

Isolated cells 17.5 pF at
23.5”C
Maximum permeability,
cm’/s
Range
Average
PL
PT

0.1 O-2.54
0.09-0.75

0.90
0.33

Maximum conductance, nS
Range
Average
gA

gK2
gNa

18.7-82.6
10.7-64.9

41.2
36.8

Intact cell 290 pF at
35.5OC
Normalized,
Maximum
cm/s
Range

Average

Q10

0.005-O. 145
0.005-0.043

0.05 1
0.019

3
3

Range
5.9-l 57
6.5-52
Maximum

Range

S/cm2

0.00 1l-0.0047
0.0006-0.0037
0.0 1o-0.022

style computer with or without math coprocessor and with some
type of screen graphics capability (Hercules, CGA, EGA, or VGA).
Intracellular
recordings from guinea pig and cat dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus (LGNd)
neurons illustrated
here were obtained with the in vitro slice technique during the performance of
experiments for previously published studies (McCormick
199 1,
1992a; McCormick
and Pape 1990a).

Average
0.0024
0.002 1
0.011

Range
1.6
1.58
1.5

0.5-2.4
0.3-l .9
4.6- 10.2

permeability,
cm3/s
Average
56
23

Model
Cell
80
40

conductance,
PS
Average
1.2
1.1
5.1

1
1
9

rectification,
with electrotonic
responses to outward
current injection being substantially smaller than to inward
current injection of the same amplitude.
Addition
of the hyperpolarization-activated
cation
current & resulted in a small depolarization of the cell at
rest because of a slight activation of this current at -63 mV.
The main effect of & was to generate a depolarizing sag in
the response to the hyperpolarizing current pulse, whereas
RESULTS
the response to the depolarizing current pulses was unGuinea pig thalamocortical
relay neurons in vitro possess changed (Fig. 10).
Turning on of the low-threshold Ca2+ current JT resulted
an average resting membrane potential of about -63 mV, a
resting input resistance of 30-90 MQ, and an average memin the appearance of a rebound Ca2+ spike on offset of hybrane time constant of - 14 ms (Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a; perpolarization (Fig. 1E) . Interestingly, this rebound Ca2+
McCormick
and Prince 1987; McCormick
and Pape spike was associated with a large depolarization that peaked
1990a). In this model of guinea pig thalamocortical
relay at 0 mV and repolarized as IT inactivated. The large amplineurons, the two leak conductances gmeak and gNaleakwere tude of the low-threshold Ca2+ spike in this simulation is
due to the lack of active K+ currents (see below). The peradjusted to 15 and 6 nS, respectively to give a resting membrane potential of -63 mV and a resting input resistance of sistent Na+ current, JNap, resulted in an enhancement of the
48 MQ. Injection of inward or outward current pulses in response to depolarizing current pulses, whereas the rethis situation resulted in passive membrane responses with sponse to hyperpolarizing current pulses was only slightly
enhanced. The persistence of the depolarization after the
a time constant of 14 ms (Fig. 1, A and D; - - -) . Addition
end of the outward current pulse in the present simulation
of each of the modeled active currents one at a time resulted
in unique alterations in the response of the modeled cell to indicates that plateau depolarizations would be produced
the current pulses (Fig. 1). Addition of 1* resulted in a by persistent Na+ currents in the absence of active K+ consmall hyperpolarization
of the cell because of tonic activa- ductances.
tion of the A-current at -63 mV, resulting from the small
“window” between activation and inactivation
of this
Two modes of action potential generation
current (see Fig. 4; Huguenard and McCormick
1992). Depolarization of the neuron transiently activated 1*, resultThalamocortical
relay neurons in vivo or in vitro display
ing in a delay with which the membrane potential obtained
two prominent modes of action potential generation: burst
its maximum value (Fig. 1A). In contrast, the response of firing, in which two to six action potentials occur in a highthe neuron to the hyperpolarizing current pulse was largely
frequency (250-400 Hz) burst riding on a low-threshold
unaltered by 1*.
Ca2+ spike; and single spike activity, in which action potenAddition of 1k2 resulted in a substantial decrease in the tials are generated in trains, the frequency of which depends
response of the model to depolarization,
whereas the re- on the strength of depolarization (Deschenes et al. 1984;
sponse to hyperpolarization
was unchanged. In addition,
Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a). Burst firing in nonoscillating
like 1*, a small amount of 1= was active at rest and there- relay neurons is typically evoked by the offset of a hyperpofore resulted in a small hyperpolarization
of the model cell. larizing current pulse and is often generated in response to
Addition of the high-threshold Ca2+ current & and the an inhibitory postsynaptic potential in vivo (see Steriade
Ca2’ -activated I(+ current I, also resulted in a marked de- and Deschenes 1984).
crease in the response of the model to depolarization,
The present model of a guinea pig LGNd relay cell also
whereas the response to hyperpolarization
was unchanged.
exhibited these two modes of action potential generation.
These results indicate that the presence of JA, IK2, and I,
Injection of a hyperpolarizing
current pulse at rest (-65
together in the model should result in marked apparent
mV) was followed by the generation of a rebound burst of

CURRENT

A

IA

CLAMP

B

MODEL

OF THALAMIC

NEURONS

1387

IK2

Ih

FIG. 1.
Effect of addition of each current on the response of the model thalamic cell to an inward and outward current
pulse of 1 nA. Model was initially set with an Ikieakof 15 nS and an lNaleakof 6 nS for a resting membrane potential of -63 mV
and an input impedance of 48 MQ. A: addition of IA results in a slowing of the rate of rise to the initial portion of the
depolarizing current pulse (is with 0.8 PS IA, - - - is Ikieakand &ieak only). Plot of the A-current (below the voltage
trace) reveals that a small amount of I, was active at rest ( /1 ) because of a “window” current and thereby hyperpolarizing the
cell by N 2 mV. Depolarization of the cell results in activation followed by complete inactivation of IA. Hyperpolarization of
the cell results in removal of activation of 1*. B: addition of 1= (0.8 pS) results in a substantial decrease in the response of the
cell to the depolarizing current pulse. C: addition of the Ca2+ current 1L ( 80 X 10 -6 cm3 / s) and the Ca2+ -activated current I,
( 1 pS) results in a marked reduction in the response to depolarizing current pulses from the activation of 1L and the
subsequent activation of IC (bottom traces). D: addition of Ih (20 nS) results in a time-dependent “sag” of the membrane
potential in the hyperpolarizing range. Note small amount of & active at rest ( I ). E: addition of 1= (40 X 10m6cm3/sec)
results in a rebound low-threshold Ca2+ spike that peaks at -0 mV. F: addition of JNapersistent results in a marked increase
in response to depolarizing current pulses. Depolarization persists because of the lack of K-currents to repolarize the cell.

four action potentials (Fig. 2A). The rebound burst re- Model of the low-threshold Ca2+ spike
sulted from the activation of the low-threshold Ca2+
current &- (Fig. 2A, 7 ), whereas the fast action potentials
The low-threshold Ca2+ spike in rodent thalamocortical
were generated by the fast Na+ current 1& Thus hyperporelay neurons was recorded in vitro after the block of voltlarization of the neuron with the current pulse led to re- age-dependent Na+ currents with the local application of
moval of inactivation of IT. On release of the hyperpolariztetrodotoxin ( 10 PM in micropipette) and after block of the
ing current pulse, the membrane repolarized back toward hyperpolarization-activated
cation current & with local aprest, thereby activating &- and subsequently generating a plication of Cs+ (20 mM in micropipette; McCormick and
low-threshold Ca2+ spike. The low-threshold Ca2+ current
Pape 1990a; Fig. 3 A ) . Intracellular injection of a depolarizthen depolarized the neuron past the threshold for the gener- ing current pulse while tonically hyperpolarizing the cell to
ation of fast, Na+-dependent
action potentials.
- 115 mV to remove inactivation of 1+rresulted in the eliciSimulation of a depolarizing current pulse resulted in a tation of a low-threshold Ca2+ spike that was characterized
train of four action potentials that showed little spike fre- by a rapid rate of rise, a much slower rate of fall, and the
quency adaptation, as in normal rodent and cat LGNd re- appearance of a fast “spike” and negative going “notch” at
lay neurons (Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a,b; McCormick
the peak of the Ca2+ spike (Fig. 3A, r( ). Differentiation of
1992a). In contrast to the hyperpolarizing
current pulse, the voltage trace with respect to time revealed that the rate
the depolarizing current pulse activated very little 1=, be- of rise for this particular cell peaked at - 12 V/s and that
cause of the nearly complete inactivation of this current at the rate of fall displayed both a fast and a slow phase (Fig.
-65 mV.
3A, d V/ dt ) . The results of modeling of a guinea pig LGNd
Therefore the model successfully replicated the presence cell under the same conditions as that of the cell of Fig. 3A
of two basic modes of action potential generation in thala- are illustrated in Fig. 3 B. The model cell was held to - 115
mocortical relay cells. Now we would like to consider in mV and a current pulse of 0.25 nA was injected. The model
more detail the role of each of the different ionic currents in cell generated a low-threshold Ca2+ spike, which exhibited a
the generation of these two modes of electroresponsiveness.
fast rate of rise and a fast and slow rate of fall (Fig. 3 B) and

1388

D. A. MCCORMICK

BI

r

L

-65 mV
7

AND J. R. HUGUENARD

100

---I-

30 mV

msec

IL I50
nAp
IK2
INap
Ih

4 nA
1 nA
0.2

(IK2)
(INap)

1

I

jm-

nA

u-----

FIG. 2. Response of the model cell to hyperpolarizing
and depolarizing
current pulses. Hyperpolarizing current pulse is followed by a rebound
burst of action potentials due to the activation of & ( 7 ). Depolarizing
current pulse results in a train of action potentials that displays little spike
frequency adaptation and very little activation of & (as in real LGNd relay
neurons).

the presence of a “peak” followed by a “notch” on the falling phase (Fig. 3 23, d ). Although the peak rate of rise of
the modeled Ca2+ spike ( 14 V/s) was higher than that in
the cell in Fig. 3A, it is within the range reported for guinea
pig thalamocortical
relay cells (Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a).
The contribution
of the different ionic currents contained in this model to the generation of the low-threshold
Ca2+ spike was examined in more detail. At resting membrane potential of -63 mV, and after block of INa and &,,
A

Guinea
I

B

Plg LGNd
0.25 nA

injection of a hyperpolarizing current pulse was followed by
the occurrence of a rebound Ca2+ spike (Fig. 4A). A plot of
the different ionic currents flowing during the rebound
Ca2+ spike revealed that the Ca2+ spike was generated
largely by the low-threshold Ca2+ current &- with a small
contribution by the high-threshold Ca2+ current 1L (Fig. 4,
A and C). A plot of the different potassium currents during
the generation of the Ca2+ spike revealed that 1*, I,, and 1=
all contributed to this electrophysiological
response (Fig. 4,
A and C) . The A-current activated earlier and more rapidly
than 1c or IK2 and therefore contributed substantially to the
rising phase of the Ca2+ spike (Fig. 4C). After the Ca2+
spike reached approximately
-45 mV, & became increasingly active, thereby activating I, at about the peak of the
Ca2+ spike. This activation of I, is in large part responsible
for the “notch” on the initial repolarizing phase of the Ca2+
spike. The slowly inactivating K+ current JK2 was active
throughout the repolarization
of the Ca2’ spike and became the dominant K+ current approximately
halfway
through repolarization (Fig. 4C). Therefore all three K+
currents appear to be involved in the shaping of the amplitude-time course of low-threshold Ca 2+ spikes, with 1* dominant during the rise of the Ca2+ spike, & dominant during
the initial phases of repolarization, and 1= dominant during the remainder of repolarization (Fig. 4C).
To test this hypothesis, each of the different K+ currents
was reduced or blocked individually and in combination to
examine the subsequent effect on the low-threshold Ca2+
spike. In addition to revealing the role of each of the different K+ currents in the shaping of the low-threshold Ca2+
spike, these simulations also revealed the interesting finding
that reduction of any one of the K+ currents results in a
compensatory increase in the other two, thereby resulting
in smaller changes in the amplitude-time
course of the Ca2’
spike than might be expected given the plots of the amplitude-time course of the different currents in Fig. 4C (see
also Yamada et al. 1989).
Reduction of 1* resulted in a substantial increase in the
rate of rise of the low-threshold Ca2+ spike and an increase
in its peak amplitude (Fig. 4A ), with little effect on its duration (not shown). Reduction or block of 1c resulted in a loss

MO&l
I

IJ

I

30 mV
,115 mV
/

/

5 v/set

FIG. 3. Simulation of low-threshold
Ca2+ spikes in
guinea pig LGNd relay neurons. A : injection of a 0.25
nA current pulse in a guinea pig LGNd relay cell after the
block of Na+ conductances with tetrodotoxin (TTX; 10
FM in micropipette) and I,, with external Cs’ (20 mM in
micropipette) and while holding the cell to - 115 mV to
remove inactivation of IT. Low-threshold Ca2-’ spike is
characterized by the presence of a marked “notch” in the
initial parts of repolarization ( r( ). Differentiation of the
voltage trace with respect to time (d V/dt) is plotted below. B: model of a guinea pig LGNd neuron. Again the
low threshold Ca2+ spike displays a prominent “notch”
during repolarization.

CURRENT

A

Reduced

CLAMP

MODEL

OF THALAMIC

NEURONS

1389

-+

IA

--=-/
I

I InJ

I 1 nA

IA
ID
IL
IT

---y

/

/ --

-----\
p

--------A

-----

2 nA
4 nA (IT)

I

D

200 pA

Gulnea Pig LGNd

12 nA
50 msec

30 msec
FIG. 4. Amplitude-time course of different currents during injection of hyperpolarizing and depolarizing current pulses
in a model guinea pig LGNd relay cell without active Na+ conductances. A: injection of a hyperpolarizing current pulse
results in a rebound Ca2+ spike (- - -). Plot of different currents illustrates that the Ca2+ spike is generated by &- with a small
contribution of 1L and is repolarized by inactivation of 1T and activation of the various IS+ currents, Ic, IA, and IK2.
Reduction of 1= from 0.8 to 0.2 ,uSresults in a substantial broadening of the duration of the Ca2+ spike, whereas reduction of
IA from 0.8 to 0.6 PS results in an increase in the rate of rise and peak amplitude of the Ca2+ spike (- - -, control; -,
reduced IK2 and IA). Interestingly, resulting changes in the Ca2+ spike are smaller than might be suspected because of
increased activation of Ic, which compensates in part for the reduced amplitude of IK2 and IA. B: expanded plot of the low
threshold Ca2+ spike and the amplitude-time course of the various currents. C: injection of a depolarizing current pulse of an
amplitude equal to the hyperpolarizing current pulse results in marked apparent rectification because of the activation of the
K + currents ( - - -) . Reducing Im and IA results in an increase in response to the depolarizing current pulse (-),
although,
again, there is a compensatory increase in Ic because of the increased depolarization (compare - - - and -)
. D: response
of a guinea pig LGNd cell to a hyperpolarizing and depolarizing current pulse before (control) and after addition of 4-AP
( 100 ,uM). This concentration of 4-AP should largely block the slowly inactivating K+ current IAs (see McCormick 199 1))
with minor effects on the quickly inactivating K+ current IA (see Huguenard et al. 199 1) . Note that the cell exhibits apparent
rectification to the depolarizing current pulse, which is lessened with 4-AP, whereas the rebound Ca2’ spike is significantly
increased in amplitude and duration by addition of this drug. Time base in D for A, C, and D.

of the hyperpolarizing “notch” in the low-threshold Ca2+
spike, an increase in the peak amplitude of this spike, an
increase in activation of IA and IK2, and a subsequent decrease in the duration of the Ca2+ spike because of increased activation of IK2 (not shown). Reductions of IK2
resulted in substantial increases in the duration of the lowthreshold Ca2+ spike and an increase in the amplitude of I,
(Fig. 4A). Reduction of I’ and IK2 together resulted in an

increase in the initial peak amplitude and duration of the
Ca2+ spike (Fig. 4A). These results are similar to those obtained with intracellular recordings from guinea pig LGNd
relay neurons in vitro (Fig. 40). Here, application of 100
PM 4-aminopyridine
(4-AP) results in a substantial increase in the duration of the low-threshold Ca2+ spike as
well as an increase in its peak amplitude (Fig. 4 D; McCormick 199 1). Bath application of 100 PM 4-AP is known to

1390

D. A. MCCORMICK

A

AND J. R. HUGUENARD

Control

A/!/LL

Vm
/

IC

/

I

L

1

1

L

30 mV

50 msec

Role ofIA and IKz in repetitive firing
1 20 nA

IA
11

nA

fi

gates
-----------

hA
-----------------

----m---___

8
hK2 __-----

Tg

mK2

B

No

No

& (Fig. 4 B, compare - - - with -).
Similar results have
been obtained in guinea pig LGNd cells. Here, block of
slowly inactivating K+ currents with 4-AP results in an increase in the amplitude of the response to a depolarizing
current pulse with no change in the response to an equal
amplitude hyperpolarizing current pulse (Fig. 4 D; McCormick 1991).

IA

IK2

FIG. 5.
Role of IA and IK2 in control of repetitive firing in model relay
neuron. A: injection of a depolarizing current pulse of 0.4 nA results in a
train of action potentials. Amplitude-time course of 3 potassium currents
(1c, IA, &) and the state of the activation ( mA, m,) and inactivation ( h,,
h - - -) gates are shown. B: reduction of IA to 0 results in a decrease in
tc’interspike interval and an increase in the response of the cell to the
depolarizing current pulse. C: similarly, block of 1= also results in a decrease in the interspike interval.

block at least the slowly inactivating K+ current IAs, a
current that is electrophysiologically
similar to 1= (McCormick 1991).
Thalamocortical
relay neurons in the rodent or cat
LGNd display marked apparent rectification in that the response to a depolarizing current pulse is substantially
smaller than that to an equal amplitude hyperpolarizing
pulse (Fig. 4 D, control). This rectification results in part
from the activation of slowly inactivating K+ currents such
as JAs(McCormick
199 1). Similarly, in the model, the cell
displayed apparent rectification
against depolarizing
current pulses (compare Fig. 4, A and B). Plots of the different K+ currents indicated that Im, 1*, and & were all
activated by the depolarizing current pulse, resulting in a
decrease in the amplitude of the subsequent depolarization
(Fig. 4 B). Reduction of & from 0.8 to 0.2 @ and 1A from
0.8 to 0.6 $3 resulted in an increase in the depolarizing
response, alth ough this increase was limited to only -3
mV, owin .g to compensatory increases in the am plitud .e of

The role of the transient K+ currents 1* and JK2 in repetitive single spike activity was investigated by examining the
amplitude-time
course of these currents during the generation of trains of action potentials and the effect of block of
these currents on the rate of action potential generation.
Application of a depolarizing current pulse into the model
cell resulted in a train of action potentials that showed only
a small amount of spike frequency adaptation, as in real
thalamocortical
relay cells (McCormick
1992a). Plots of
the different K+ currents revealed that although 1* and &
contributed to the repolarization of each Na+ action potential, the main K+ current involved in this was I, (Fig. 5A).
In contrast, 1* and 1= formed the dominant K+ currents in
between action potentials. In particular, the slow depolarization of the membrane potential toward the initiation of
each Na+ action potential resulted in an increase in activation of JA (Fig. 5A), which subsequently slowed the rate of
depolarization and controlled the membrane potential trajectory as action potential threshold was approached. The
occurrence of the action potential then rapidly activated 1*
and failed to completely inactivate 1* ; therefore this current
contributed to repolarization of the fast spike. Examination
of the gates for 1* and 1= indicated that the activation (m,)
and inactivation ( hA) variables for 1* were substantially
more dynamic than the activation (m,) and inactivation
variables ( hK2) for JK2 (Fig. 54 ) . This result indicates that
variations in the amplitude of 1* are both the consequence
of changes in the gates for 1* and the difference between the
membrane potential and EK, whereas variations in the amplitude of 1= during a train of action potentials depend
substantially on the driving force on K+ ions (Fig. 5A).
Reduction of either 1* or 1k2 resulted in substantial increases in the firing frequency during the depolarizing
current pulse (Fig. 5, B and C), confirming the importance
of these ionic currents in the shaping of the train of action
potentials. The rapidly inactivating K+ current 1* is dynamically involved in the shaping of each action potential afterhyperpolarization,
whereas the kinetically slower current
1k2 modulates firing rate through more prolonged changes
in excitability.
Electrophysiological
consequences ofI,+
Rodent and cat LGNd cells in vivo and in vitro display a
marked depolarizing
“sag” upon hyperpolarization
because of the activation of a hyperpolarization-activated
cation current known as & (Fig. 6A; McCormick
and Pape
1990a; Steriade et al. 199 1). Similarly, addition of & to the
model cell resulted in substantial depolarizing “sags” in the
response to prolonged hyperpolarizations
(Fig. 6 D), owing
to the activation of & (Fig. 6 E). The amplitude and rate of

A

C

I InJ

I Inj

6. Hyperpolarization-activated
cation current
generates a substantial inward “sag” in the membrane
response. A and R: intracellular responses of a guinea pig
LGNd cell to prolonged (2 set) hyperpolarizing current
pulses after block of active Na+ current with TTX. Note
the prominent inward sag in the hyperpolarizing direction. This sag is completely blocked by block of Ih with
external Cs+ (not shown; McCormick and Pape 1990a).
C and D: response of the model neuron to a prolonged
hyperpolarizing current pulse. Activation of Ih (E) results in a marked depolarizing sag of the membrane potential (D) . Block of & illustrates the response of the cell
to the largest current pulse without this current (No I,J.
FIG.

B

Ih

D

Vm

Vm

4

E

1
L

20 mV
1 set
4

No Ih

E
ih

Guinea

pig

C

LGNd

-8%

Cat

-83

B

D

LGNd

J 1 cs+
Control

20 mV
200 msec

Vm

I

I1 nA
0
Ih

1 0.2 nA

IT

I5

mH
------mT

hT
. -e-- ------------

nA

_----__ ----__mH
--- 100% open
mT I
FIG. 7. Activation and deactivation of the H-current generates a slow afterhyperpolarization
after a Ca2+ spike in guinea
pig (A) and cat (C) LGNd cells. A : injection of a short-duration ( 10 msec) depolarizing current pulse into a guinea pig
LGNd cell in the presence of TTX and after hyperpolarization to -85 mV results in a low threshold Ca2+ spike, followed by
an afterhyperpolarization. B: injection of a depolarizing current pulse in the model cell also results in a prolonged afterhyperpolarization, which is due to the activation of Ih (see Ih and wl,). C: Activation of a low threshold Ca2+ spike in a cat LGNd
cell results in a burst of Na+ spikes and a prolonged afterhyperpolarization. This afterhyperpolarization is almost completely
blocked by reduction of Ih with extracellular application of Cs+ ( 10 mM in micropipette). Note the difference in duration of
low threshold Ca2+ spikes in cat vs. guinea pig LGNd relay cells. D: model of the results in C. Block of Ih results in a nearly
complete abolition of the slow afterhyperpolarization. Residual AHP is due to activation of IK2 ( not shown ) .
---- --------_

, /.
I,

1391

1392

D. A. MCCORMICK

AND

repolarization of the membrane increased with increases in
hyperpolarization
of the modeled cell, owing to the decrease in time constant of activation of & and the increased
activation of this current (see Fig. 7 in Huguenard and
McCormick
1992). Block of & completely removed this
electrophysiological
feature of the model cell (Fig. 6 0).
In cat LGNd cells it has been proposed that decreased
activation and subsequent reactivation of & may form the
slow afterhyperpolarization
(AHP) that appears after the
generation of a low-threshold Ca2+ spike (McCormick
and
Pape 1990a). Indeed, modeling of the generation of lowthreshold Ca 2+ spikes from a hyperpolarized membrane
potential (-85 mV) resulted in the appearance of a slow
AHP, as in guinea pig LGNd cells in vitro (Fig. 7, A and B).
Examination of the flow of ionic currents during the slow
AHP in the model cell revealed that it is largely due to
decreased activation ( ?nh) of & during the Ca2+ spike and
the subsequent reactivation of the current on repolarization
(Fig. 7 B). The residual AHP is due to activation of 1= by
the low-threshold Ca2+ spike (not shown).
Intracellular recordings from LGNd relay cells in guinea
pig, rat, and cat have revealed that low-threshold Ca2+
spikes in cat are substantially longer in duration than those
either in guinea pig or rat (Crunelli et al. 1989; McCormick,
unpublished observations). In this model the low-threshold
Ca2+ spikes were similar in duration to those in rodent (Fig.
7, A and B) but substantially shorter in duration than those
in cat (Fig. 7, C and 0). The similarity of the modeled Ca2+
spikes to those in rodent is consistent with the fact that the
model is based on voltage-clamp analysis of currents in rodent thalamocortical
relay neurons (Huguenard
and
McCormick
1992).
Block of & in cat LGNd neurons with the local application of Cs+ results in a nearly complete abolition of the slow
AHP occurring after the generation of a low-threshold Ca2+
spike (Fig. 7C; McCormick
and Pape 1990a). Similarly,
block of 1h in the model also resulted in a near abolition of
the slow AHP (Fig. 7 D), confirming that this electrophysiological feature of thalamocor-tical relay cells is generated
largely by &. To summarize, the generation of a low-threshold Ca2+ spike is associated with a decrease in activation of
& ( as indicated by a decrease in mh ; Fig. 7, B and D) . On
inactivation of I, (h, in Fig. 7, B and D), the membrane
repolarizes and overshoots the original potential because of
a decreased Ih. The subsequent increased activation of Ii,
(mh, Fig. 7, B and D) results in a slow depolarization of the
membrane potential back toward rest, thus generating an
apparent AHP (Fig. 7, A and C).
Contribution of ionic currents to rhythmi
Ca2+ spike
generation
Cat LGNd cells maintained in vitro, or hyperpolarized in
vivo, generate rhythmic high-frequency burst discharges
(Fig. 84; McCormick
and Pape 1990a; Steriade et al.
199 1). We have previously proposed that these rhythmic
burst discharges arise from the interaction of the low-threshold Ca2+ current 1-r and the hyperpolarization-activated
cation current Jh (McCormick
and Pape 1990a). Here we examined the electrophysiological
features of rhythmic burst
firing with this model.

J. R. HUGUENARD

Intracellular recordings in rodent and cat LGNd cells in
vitro reveal that cat LGNd cells have a much greater propensity toward slow rhythmic burst discharges than do rodent LGNd cells (McCormick,
unpublished observations).
This increased propensity may result in part from the substantially longer duration of cat low-threshold Ca2+ spikes
in comparison to those of guinea pig or rat (e.g., Fig. 7).
Indeed, we found here that the model thalamocortical
relay
cell would not support rhythmic burst firing unless the duration of the low-threshold Ca2+ spike was increased through
either a reduction of the amplitude of IU (Fig. 4A) or a
slowing of the kinetics of inactivation of Jr (not shown).
Both of these methods of increasing the duration of the
low-threshold spike resulted in the ability of the modeled
cell to generate rhythmic Ca2+ spikes with similar characteristics. In this model, we chose to increase the duration of
the low-threshold Ca2+ spike through reduction of JK2
(from 1 to 0.2 @) because substantial differences in kinetics of cat and rodent T-currents have not yet been established.
Application
of tetrodotoxin
to cat LGNd cells maintained in vitro blocks voltage-dependent Na+ currents and
reveals the underlying low-threshold Ca2+ spikes that supA

Cat

LGNd

Normal

FIG. 8. Rhythmic
burst firing in cat LGNd relay neurons and model of
such. A and B: intracellular
recording
showing rhythmic
oscillation
of a cat
LGNd cell in the lack of current injection
before (A) and after (B) application of TTX ( 10 PM in micropipette).
Note prominent
“pacemaker”
potential in between low threshold
Ca2+ spikes. C: model of rhythmic
oscillation in cat LGNd
cells. Plot of the amplitude-time
course of different
currents reveals that Ca2+ spikes are generated by IT; their amplitude-time
course is modulated
by activation
of I,, IA, and IK2; and Ih generates the
“pacemaker”
potential in between low threshold
Ca2+ spikes. Although
Ih
is a small current,
it forms a dominant
component
of active currents in
between Ca2+ spikes.

CURRENT

CLAMP

MODEL

port rhythmic burst firing (Fig. 8, A and B; McCormick
and Pape 1990a). These rhythmic Ca2+ spikes are characterized by the appearance of a “pacemaker” potential that
slowly depolarizes the membrane potential in between
Ca2+ spikes (Fig. 8 B). Interestingly, the model of thalamocortical relay cells was able to support rhythmic burst firing
and the generation of rhythmic low-threshold Ca2+ spikes
at a frequency similar to that found in cat LGNd cells (OS4 Hz) (Fig. SC). A plot of the different ionic currents flowing during the generation of rhythmic Ca2+ spikes revealed
that each Ca2+ spike is generated largely by Jr, with a
smaller contribution of &. As stated above, the K+ currents
1*, I,, and 1= are all involved in the shaping of the amplitude-time course and repolarization
of each Ca2+ spike.
The hyperpolarization-activated
cation current & forms
only a small ionic current, with a peak amplitude in this
example of - 100 pA (Fig. 8C, &). However, even though
this ionic current is small, it exhibits substantial influence
on the membrane potential in between each Ca2+ spike,
owing to the near nonexistence of other voltage-dependent
currents in between Ca2+ spikes (Fig. 8C). Thus Ii., forms
the “pacemaker”
potential that slowly depolarizes the
membrane potential in between Ca2+ spikes and activates
each Ca2+ spike by activating 1*.
The contribution of each of the different ionic currents to
rhythmic burst firing was examined by altering the maximal amplitude of the conductance underlying each current.
Reduction of g,,,, to 0 nS resulted in an abolition of rhythmic oscillation and of the depolarizing “pacemaker” potential or “sag” on hyperpolarization
(Fig. 9A ) . Increasing
ghmaxto as little as 5 nS resulted in the appearance of rhythmic Ca2+ spikes (Fig. 9A ) . Increasing ghmax to 10 nS increased the frequency of Ca2+ spike generation and decreased the amplitude of each Ca2+ spike (Fig. 9 B). Further increases of g,,,, to 15 and 20 nS resulted in a failure to
support rhythmic oscillation indefinitely,
but rather resulted in damped oscillations that supported from four to
seven cycles (Fig. 9, C and D).
Careful examination of the amplitude and time course of
& and I, and their underlying gates revealed the following
sequence of events: at the starting membrane potential of
-55 mV very little g, or gr is active owing to the low level of
m, and the complete inactivation ( hT) of gT (Fig. 9A). As
the membrane potential hyperpolarizes toward Ek, & begins
t0 XtiVate
(increase
in ???h)and the inactivation of &. is
largely removed (increase in hT) (Fig. 9A). Increases in mh
result in an increase in Jh, which subsequently depolarizes
the membrane potential toward Eh ( -40 mV). The depolarization of the membrane eventually increases the activation
of I, ( m,), which further depolarizes the membrane potential and further increases m, in a positive feedback manner.
Subsequently a low-threshold Ca2+ spike is generated. The
increase in inactivation of & (h*) and the activation of 1*,
I,, and 1= results in the repolarization of the membrane
and a subsequent increase in activation of & ( mh ; Fig. 9A).
At low levels of g,,,, (5- 10 nS), this oscillation quickly
reached a steady state and continued indefinitely.
Increases in the amplitude of maximal g, result in increases in the frequency of oscillation through an increase
in the rate of rise of the membrane potential in between

OF

THALAMIC

Change

\
/

1393

NEURONS

Ih Amplitude

I

!

1

mH

FIG. 9. Effect of changing
Ih amplitude
on rhythmic
Ca2+ spike generation in the model cat LGNd relay cell. All simulations
start at -55 mV. If
maximal
h-conductance
is 0 nS, then the cell fails to oscillate, but comes to
rest at about -95 mV. A : addition of 5 nS of ghmax results in slow rhythmic
Ca2+ spikes. Increase of ghmax to 10 nS (B) increases the frequency
of
rhythmic
Ca2+ spikes and decreases their amplitude.
Increasing ghmax to 15
or 20 nS results in a damped oscillation
(C and 0) because of the lack of
sufficient removal of inactivation
of &- (h,, - - -) and therefore
a failure of
the low threshold
Ca2+ spikes.

subsequent Ca2+ spikes and consequently a decrease in the
time interval before the next Ca2’ spike threshold is
reached. However, increasing ghmax past a critical level
( - 12 nS in this simulation) results in such a decrease in the
depth of hyperpolarization
of the membrane in between
low-threshold Ca2+ spikes that the amount of inactivation
of &- that is removed is insufficient to maintain rhythmic
oscillation (Fig. 9, C and 0).
Increasing the amplitude of the maximal T-current permeability (pr ) revealed that the model would support
rhythmic Ca 2+ spike generation only at values of 240
( X lop6 cm3/sec) or greater (Fig. 10). Increasing pr from
40 to 80 was found to increase the frequency of rhythmic
Ca2+ spike generation and increase the amplitude of each
Ca2+ spike (Fig. 10, B-D). When pT was set below 40, there
was too little & available to support the continual generation of rhythmic Ca2+ spikes ( Fig. 1OA ) .
In addition to & and Jr, another important current in the
generation of rhythmic Ca2+ spikes was IUeak. This current
was important for drawing the membrane potential toward
EK in between Ca2+ spikes and therefore helping to remove

D. A. MCCORMICK

1394

AND J. R. HUGUENARD

Change IT Amplitude
B

I-

30 mV

Vm

0.5 set

1990a; McCormick and Williamson
199 1). In contrast, activation of adenosine-A, receptors appears to result in a
shift in the activation curve of & to more negative membrane potentials (Pape 1992). Although preliminary evidence in vitro indicates that the positive shift in & activation results in the abolition
of rhythmic burst firing
(McCormick
and Pape 1990b), this effect has not yet been
studied in detail, particularly for small alterations in &,.
Therefore we examined here with the model of rhythmic
Ca2+ spike generation the effect of alterations in the voltage
dependency of Ih.
Shifts of the voltage dependence of & from -2.5 to - 10
mV resulted in a slowing of the frequency of rhythmic Ca2+
spike generation and an increase in the amplitude of each
Ca2+ spike (Fig. 12, -2.5, -5.0, -7.5, and - 10.0 mV).
Likewise, shifting & voltage dependence by +2.5 to + 10
mV resulted in an increase of the rate of rhythmic oscillation and a decrease in the amplitude of each Ca2+ spike
(Fig. 12,2.5,5.0,7.5,and
lO.OmV).Inaddition,shiftsofI,
by as little as 2.5 mV resulted in conversion of the rhythmic
Ca2+ spike generation to a “damped oscillation” ( Fig. 12,
2.5, 5.0, 7.5, and 10.0 mV) as reported previously in cat
LGNd thalamocortical
neurons (McCormick
and Pape
1990b). These results indicate that the neurotransmitter
control of the voltage sensitivity of & may strongly influence the ability of thalamocortical
relay neurons to gener-

7

10. Effect of changes in amplitude of IT on rhythmic Ca2+ spike
generation. With a pr of 20 or 30 ( X 10 -6 cm3 / set) the cell fails to oscillate.
Increasing pr from 40 to 80 increases the amplitude of the low threshold
Ca2+ spikes and the frequency of oscillation.

Change

FIG.

inactivation of 1=. When gKleakwas set to 4 nS, the modeled
cell displayed only a damped oscillation owing to the lack of
sufficient hyperpolarization
in between sequential Ca 2+
spikes (Fig. 11 A). Increasing gKleak to 6 nS supported the
generation of rhythmic Ca2+ spikes and slowed the frequency of their generation, whereas further increases to 8
nS further enhanced rhythmic Ca2+ spike generation and
the amplitude of each Ca2+ spike. Additional increases of
gKleakto 10 nS abolished the ability of the model to generate
rhythmic Ca 2+ spikes, owing to an inability of & to depolarize the membrane potential sufficiently to activate &
(Fig. 11 D).
These results reveal that the ability of thalamocortical
relay neurons to generate rhythmic low-threshold Ca2+
spikes is a complex interaction requiring a balancing of the
amplitude and properties of at least &, JT, and the conductances that determine the resting membrane potential and
input resistance (e.g., leak conductances).
Effects of alteration in voltage dependence of Ih on
rhythmic Ca2+ spike generation
Application of a variety of putative neurotransmitters
to
thalamocortical
relay neurons in vitro results in alterations
in the voltage dependency of & (McCormick
and Pape
1990b; McCormick and Williamson
199 1; Pape 1992). For
example, activation of ,B-noradrenergic, serotoninergic, or
histaminergic-H,
receptors results in a positive shift of the
activation curve of 1h bv 5-- 10 mV (McCormick
and Pape

IKleak

A

Amplitude
B

“h-

Vm

-96mV

-----

----

-----

---&

;;--;

----------

-

;;

mvv

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

;

LLlub&e ga+es
c I I ,

D

130 mV
I
0.5 set

Vm
-96
- At- ~~

~~-------~~-~~~~~~~~~__,

-96 mV
%

I
I

I/

-\ \ \
\

’

’

\

;;

‘\----;

gates

)II
AI

’

__________________,
-----------,

hT

‘-\
‘\\.-

MT

--a___

o2
I

-----we_

nA

~“*

5
8
i 8

FIG. 1 1. Effect of changes in JKleakamplitude on the generation of low
threshold Ca2+ spikes. A: with a gKieak of 4 nS, the model cell fails to
maintain oscillation because of decreased hyperpolarization in between
Ca2+ spikes and a subsequent decrease in the removal of inactivation of
sufficient 1-r to maintain oscillation. B: increasing gKleakto 6 nS results in
maintained oscillation. C: increases to 8 nS slow the frequency of oscillation. D: increases to 10 nS block oscillation because of inability of & to
depolarize the membrane sufficiently to activate a low threshold Ca2+
spike.

CURRENT

CLAMP

MODEL

OF THALAMIC

NEURONS

1395

ate slow rhythmic Ca2+ spikes and the frequency with
which these Ca2+ spikes occur.
Effect of rhythmic oscillation
depolarizing inputs

30 mV

m

on response to
f3

Extracellular recordings of LGNd neurons during the
shift from sleep to waking reveal not only that there is a
disappearance of rhythmic burst firing and the appearance
of single spike activity, but also that the response of these
neurons to visual inputs is also greatly enhanced (Coenen
and Vendrik 1972; Livingstone and Hubel 198 1). One possible reason for these changes in the responsiveness of
LGNd relay cells is that the burst and single spike firing
modes differ in their responsiveness to depolarizations associated with barrages of excitatory postsynaptic potentials
from the retina. To investigate this possibility in this model,
we examined the response of the model cell to the injection
of a depolarizing current pulse while the cell either was
rhythmically bursting or after tonic depolarization to near
fast Na+ spike firing threshold.
Intracellular
injection of a depolarizing current pulse
during rhythmic burst firing resulted in a initial burst of
action potentials resulting from the activation of 1* (Fig.
13 B, \ ) followed by a disruption of rhythmic oscillation
because of tonic depolarization (Fig. 13 B). The amplitude
of the initial burst response depended on the amount of
time which had passed since the Ca2+ spike before the injecShift Ih Voltage Dependence
-lo,0

-75

I

-83

I-in]

200

msec

mV

,

I

0.25

nA
1 0.2 nA

\d
IT

v

\r,,

M-

F14*

FIG. 13. Response of the model cell to a depolarizing
current pulse
(0.25 nA) during oscillation and after reduction of JKleak.A : reduction of
gKleakto 2 nS results in a new membrane potential of -6 1 mV. Injection of
a current pulse at this membrane potential results in a train of action
potentials. B : increasing gKleakto 7 nS results in the appearance of rhythmic burst firing. Injection of the same current pulse now results in only a
transient burst at the beginning of the pulse because of activation of the low
threshold Ca2+ current, &- ( \ ). Current pulse also blocks the rhythmic
oscillation.

tion of the current pulse (not shown). Decrease of gKleak
from 7 to 2 nS, as occurs in vitro in response to acetylcholine, norepinephrine,
or histamine (McCormick
1992a;
McCormick and Prince 1987; McCormick and Williamson
199 1 ), resulted in a depolarization of the model cell to near
firing threshold. Injection of the same depolarizing current
pulse now resulted in a train of action potentials that
showed little, if any, spike frequency adaptation (Fig. 13A).
Examination
of the different ionic currents during the
shift in firing mode from rhythmic bursting to single spike
activity on reduction of IKleak revealed that the persistent
Na+ current &, was particularly important in facilitating
the depolarization
of the membrane sufficiently to bring
the membrane to, or close to, single spike firing threshold.
DISCUSSION

I

200

2
2
msec

12. Effect of changing Ii-, voltage dependence on rhythmic Ca2+
spike generation in model cat LGNd cell. Shifting Ih voltage dependence
from 10 mV more negative ( - 10.0) to 10 mV more positive ( 10.0) results
in substantial changes in the frequency of oscillation, amplitude of each
Ca2+ spike, and the ability of the cell to maintain oscillation.
FIG.

Intracellular recordings in vivo and in vitro from thalamocortical relay neurons have shown that these cells possessa number of unique electrophysiological
properties, including the ability to generate high frequency burst discharges on removal of hyperpolarization
(Deschenes et al.
1984; Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a,b); tonic firing during depolarization that displays little, if any, spike frequency adaptation (Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a; McCormick
1992a) ; apparent rectification at rest, in which the response to depolarizing current pulses is considerably smaller than that to
hyperpolarizing current pulses (McCormick
199 1); and finally, the ability to generate intrinsic rhythmic burst firing
at interburst frequencies of 0.5-4 Hz (Curro Dossi et al.
199 1; Leresche et al. 199 1; McCormick
and Pape 1990a;
Soltesz et al. 199 1; Steriade et al. 1992). These electrophysiological features of thalamocortical
relay neurons have
been proposed to underlie the different modes of action
potential generation that thalamocortical
relay neurons dis-

1396

D. A. MCCORMICK

AND

play in vivo, particularly in the transition from rhythmic
burst firing to tonic activity associated with the transition
from slow wave sleep to waking or to rapid-eye-movement
sleep (reviewed in Steriade and Deschenes 1984; Steriade
and Llinas 1988). The present model of thalamocortical
relay neurons successfully replicated all of the above-listed
electrophysiological
features of these cells.

Rebound burst discharges
As revealed by in vitro experiments in thalamocortical
relay neurons (Coulter et al. 1989; Crunelli et al. 1989;
Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a,b; Hernandez-Cruz
and Pape
1989)) our results confirm the central role of the low-threshold Ca2+ spike in the generation of rebound high frequency
burst discharges on the release of a phasic hyperpolarization. In addition, the present simulation of low-threshold
Ca2+ spikes suggests that this electrophysiological
response
is considerably
influenced by the amplitude and time
course of various
voltage- and Ca2+-dependent
K+
currents. In particular, the transient and rapidly inactivating K+ current 1* (Huguenard
et al. 199 1) appears to be
particularly involved in the rising phase of the low-threshold Ca2+ spike, whereas the more slowly inactivating K+
current Jk2 (Huguenard
and Prince 199 1) controls the repolarizing phase of the Ca2+ spike (Fig. 4A). The possibility that transient K’ currents may control the shape of the
low-threshold
Ca2+ spike has recently received experimental support with in vitro experiments in which the bath application of 100 PM 4-AP, which abolishes the slowly inactivating K+ current IAs, resulted in an increase in the duration of the low-threshold
Ca2+ spike and an increase in its
peak amplitude ( see Fig. 4 D; McCormick
199 1) . In addition, in the present model, the Ca2+-activated
K+ current
also contributed
substantially
to the shaping of the lowthreshold Ca2+ spike, particularly during the most depolarized membrane potentials, owing to the voltage dependency of this current and the activation of the high threshold Ca2’ current .
An interesting, and potentially important, finding of this
simulation and those of others (Yamada et al. 1989) concerns the interpretation
of current-clamp
recordings when
an ionic current is reduced or blocked. In the present
model, a decrease in any one or two of the voltage-dependent K+ currents resulted in an increase in the remaining
K+ currents in response to a depolarizing event (e.g., fast
action potential, Ca 2+ spike, or current injection), owing to
the increased depolarization of the cell. This compensatory
increase in the remaining K+ currents could result in a substantially smaller change in the membrane potential than
expected based merely on the amplitude of the blocked
current alone (e.g., Fig. 4, A and B). Results obtained with
current-clamp
recordings in vitro must, therefore, take into
account this potential difficulty of interpretation.

Tonic firing
Modeling of the response of thalamocortical
relay neurons to tonic depolarization
revealed trains of fast action
potentials that display relatively little spike frequency adaptation (e.g., Figs. 2 and 5). Examination
of the different

J. R. HUGUENARD

ionic currents involved in fast action potential generation
revealed that each spike was generated by the fast Na+
current JNa with an additional contribution
by the highthreshold Ca2+ current &. The subsequent activation of &
(with an additional contribution
by /A and 1k2) resulted in
repolarization of each action potential. The exact contribution of each of these different K+ currents in the repolarization of action potentials in thalamic relay neurons remains
to be examined, particularly because the Ca2+-activated K+
conductances of these cells have not yet been characterized.
It may be that the relative contributions
of 1*, 1=, and
Ca2+-activated K+ currents to repolarization of fast action
potentials in thalamic relay cells are substantially different
from those modeled here. In other neuronal cell types, most
notably hippocampal pyramidal cells and sympathetic ganglion cells, the repolarization
of fast action potentials is
achieved through the activation of a variety of K+ currents,
of which Ca2+ -activated K+ currents appear to contribute a
major role at depolarized membrane potentials (e.g., positive to -60 mV; Belluzzi and Sacchi 1988, 199 1; Lancaster
and Nicoll 1987; Storm 1987). The lack of spike frequency
adaptation in LGNd neurons and this model presumably
results from the apparent lack of the slow Ca2+-activated
K+ current known as lAHp in these cells (see Madison and
Nicoll 1984; Pennefather et al. 1985). Indeed, relay neurons of the parateanial thalamic nucleus display both a substantial slow afterhyperpolarizing
current and spike frequency adaptation (McCormick
and Prince 1988; McCormick, unpublished observations).
The lack of significant
spike frequency adaptation in LGNd relay cells presumably
allows these cells to relay trains of action potentials from
the retina to the visual cortex for prolonged periods of time
without decay.

Apparent rect$cation
Previous in vitro intracellular recordings from thalamocortical relay neurons have suggested that the activation of
various K+ currents may be involved in decreasing the response of these cells to phasic or tonic depolarization
(McCormick
199 1). Our results confirm and extend this
hypothesis
and reveal that depolarization
from resting
membrane potentials typical for those obtained with intracellular recordings in vitro or in vivo may result in the activation of I,, 1k2, and I,, all of which subsequently can
reduce the amplitude of the electrotonic response. In particular, the activation of the more slowly inactivating or noninactivating currents JK2 and I, is important to the reduction of the response to prolonged ( >50 ms) depolarization.
The ability of thalamocortical
relay cells to display reduced responsiveness
to depolarization
and the apparent
favoring of response to hyperpolarization
may explain in
part the observation that thalamocortical
relay neurons are
highly responsive to inhibitory postsynaptic potentials during periods of slow wave sleep, while being considerably less
responsive to excitatory postsynaptic
potentials (reviewed
in Steriade and Deschenes 1984; Steriade and Llinas 1988 ) .
In contrast, tonic depolarization
of thalamocortical
relay
neurons, such as that which occurs during the waking state
(Hirsch et al. 1983), abolishes this bias such that the neu-

CURRENT

CLAMP

MODEL

ron responds to depolarizing and hyperpolarizing current
pulses in a more equitable manner (McCormick
199 1).
This intrinsic bias at hyperpolarized membrane potentials
in favor of rebound burst discharges to inhibitory postsynaptic potentials and the lack of firing to excitatory postsynaptic potentials may facilitate the appearance of intrathalamic rhythmic burst firing and the filtering, or lack of responsiveness, to excitatory postsynaptic potentials of
retinal or cortical origin during periods of slow wave sleep.
In addition, the electroresponsive properties of thalamic
neurons during endogenous rhythmic burst firing results in
an emphasis of the initial portions of depolarizations with a
lack of response to prolonged events (i.e., Fig. 13). It remains to be determined whether this emphasis of low-frequency transient events is of value in the processing of sensory information (see discussion in McCormick and Feeser
1990).
Intrinsic

rhythmic burst Jiring

The ability of cat thalamocortical
relay neurons to generate intrinsic rhythmic burst firing in the frequency range of
OS-4 Hz has been suggested to result from the interplay of
the low-threshold Ca2+ current Jr and the hyperpolarization-activated
cation current & (McCormick
and Pape
1990a; Soltesz et al. 199 1). The model of thalamocortical
relay neurons confirmed that it is possible to support rhythmic Ca2+ spike generation based solely on the presence of
these two currents, with the addition of leak currents to
determine the membrane potential and apparent input resistance. Examination
of the actions of the different ionic
currents in the present model revealed that rhythmic Ca2+
spike generation undergoes a regular and repeating sequence of events in which the Ca2+ spike is activated by Jr
and the “pacemaker” potential is generated by 1h (Figs.
8-l 1). One of the most important factors involved in the
generation of rhythmic Ca2+ spike generation was the
amount of T-current permeability (pT) available before activation of each Ca2+ spike. If the amount of pr available
(i.e., not inactivated) became too small, then rhythmic
Ca2+ spike generation eventually failed and the neuron displayed a “damped” oscillation. The amount of pr available
before each Ca2’ spike generated depends on two important factors: the maximal T-current permeability present in
the neuron and the depth and duration ofthe hyperpolarization, and therefore the degree of removal of inactivation of
IT, before the Ca2+ spike. The depth and duration of the
hyperpolarization
before the Ca2+ spike depended in this
model on the amplitude and kinetics of & and the amplitude of the leak currents IUeak and INaleak. Increasing the
amplitude of &, or shifting its voltage dependence to more
positive membrane potentials leads to a decrease in the duration and depth of hyperpolarization
in between rhythmic
Ca2+ spikes and therefore to an increase in the frequency of
oscillation and a decrease in the amplitude of each Ca2+
spike. Similar results have been obtained from cat LGNd
neurons in vitro. Local extracellular application of Cs+,
which reduces Ih, results in hyperpolarization
of these cells,
a dramatic increase in the amplitude of the low-threshold
Ca2+ spike (and therefore an increase in the number of Na+

OF

THALAMIC

NEURONS

1397

spikes generated), and a slowing of the frequency of oscillation (McCormick
and Pape 1990a).
Activation of P-adrenergic receptors, H,-histaminergic
receptors, and serotoninergic receptors all result in positive
shifts in the voltage dependence of & and in the activation
kinetics of this current (McCormick
and Pape 1990b;
McCormick
and Williamson
199 1) . Similarly, activation
of adenylate cyclase or increases in intracellular concentrations of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(CAMP) have
similar effects, suggesting that the above-mentioned
receptors may alter & through this second messenger. Although
we have previously proposed that maximal (5-10 mV)
shifts in the voltage dependence of 1h abolish the ability of
thalamocortical
relay cells to rhythmically
burst (McCormick and Pape 1990b), the effect of more subtle alterations
in & has not yet been examined. In this model, we found
that subtle (mV) alteration in the voltage dependence of &
can strongly influence the rate of rhythmic Ca 2+ spike generation from a frequency of 0.5 to one of -4 Hz (Fig. 12).
Thus the activity of brainstem monoaminergic
neurons
and hypothalamic histaminergic cells may control in part
the frequency and propensity with which thalamocortical
cells generate rhythmic burst firing through alterations in
the voltage dependence of &.
Comparison

with other thalamic

models

Over the past few years a number of other mathematical
models of thalamic neurons have been published that successfully mimicked one or more features of thalamic relay
cells, including the generation of low-threshold Ca2+ spikes
(Dextexhe and Babloyantz 199 1; Rose and Hindmarsh
1985, 1989; Wang et al. 199 1) and the generation of tonic
single spike firing on depolarization (Rose and Hindmarsh
1989; McMullen
and Ly 1988). However, these models
were limited owing to the limited information available on
the different ionic currents present in thalamocortical
relay
cells. In addition, the ability of thalamic relay cells to oscillate intrinsically
has been demonstrated
only recently,
along with the appreciation of the importance of the hyperpolarization-activated
cation current in this oscillation
(e.g., McCormick and Pape 1990a). Like previous models,
these simulations successfully replicated the presence of
two firing modes in thalamic relay neurons: burst firing and
single spike activity. However, in addition, this model also
predicted the presence of slow-frequency rhythmic behavior, apparent rectification of the membrane potential at
rest, and the contribution of the various K+ currents to the
amplitude-time
course of the low-threshold Ca2+ spikes.
The similarity between rhythmic low-threshold Ca 2+
spike generation in this model of thalamocortical
relay cells
and the proposed mechanisms of rhythm generation in cardiac cells is striking and deserves comment. DiFrancesco
and Noble ( 1985, 1989) have presented a model of cardiac
pacemaking in which the hyperpolarization-activated
cation current 1, makes an important
contribution
to the
“pacemaker” potential. This current contributes to the determination of the frequency of rhythmic activity in that it
activates on hyperpolarization
in between action potentials
and repolarizes
I
the membrane toward threshold for ”genera-

1398

D. A. MCCORMICK

AND

tion of the next action potential. A number of neuromodulatory substances alter the voltage sensitivity of I,, much in
the same manner as &, ( see DiFrancesco 1985; DiFrancesco
et al. 1989; DiFranceico and Tortora 199 1). For example,
activation of cyclic AMP or stimulation of ,&adrenergic receptors results in a marked enhancement of If through a
positive shift in its voltage sensitivity ( DiFrancesco -and
Tortora 199 1 ), as it does Ih in thalamic relay cells (McCormick an .d Pape 1990a). These similarities suggest that hyper-polar <zation-activated cation currents may have a genera1 role in the generation of rhythmic oscillation in various
types of electrically excitable cells.

J. R. HUGUENARD

P=

-0.062*(

The inactivation

Vm + 38)/

{ 1 - exp[(

Vm

+ W/Y >

646)

I

W)
(A@

variable h was described by
CY= O.O16=exp[(-55
p = 2.07/(exp[(17

These parameters
( 1988 ) obtained
ductance, &max
with the model
(1991).

-

V,,)/15

- V&21]

+ l>

were derived from the data of Huguenard et al.
from cortical pyramidal cells. The maximal con7 for this current was set to 12 PS in accordance
of Naf action potentials by Beluzzi and Sacchi

I Nap

APPENDIX

The model of thalamocortical
relay cell was constructed using
the following equations. The principal equation describing the
change in intracellular
potential with respect to time was

+

IK2

+

Ih

+

JKleak

+

JNaleak

) / Gin

CA

The transient Na+ current, INa, was described by the following
Hodgkin-and-Huxley-style
equations
=

gNamax

l

cE

-

ENa)

l

m3h

W)

is the maximal conductance, E is the membrane
where gNarnax
potential, ENa is the equilibrium
potential for Na+ (assumed to be
+45 mV), m is the activation variable and varies from 0 (not
activated) to 1 (fully activated), and h is the inactivation variable
and also varies from 0 (completely inactivated) to 1 (no inactivation). In all Hodgkin-and-Huxley-style
descriptions, the steadystate activation or inactivation variables were described by

%a,)
and the time constant,
scribed by

7, of activation
7=

For the activation
a = 0 .091

= 4(, + P)

(A-u

or inactivation

was de-

+ 38)/

(I - exp[-(

=

gNapmaxe(E

-

(A9

ENa)em

The voltage dependen ce of activation of the persistent
current was described by th e Boltzman eq uation
mNapm

= l/(1

+ exp[(-49

- V,)/5])

Na +
WO)

This equation is that derived by French et al. ( 1990) on the basis
of data obtained from hippocampal
pyramidal cells. The kinetics
of activation of &ap are not yet available, although it is known to
activate rapidly in cortical pyramidal neurons (Stafstrom et al.
1985). Here we assumed the same kinetics for activation for &,
as for gNa. The maximal conductance for &p was set to 7 nS, in
accordance with the data of French et al. ( 1990).

The Ca2+-activated K+ current I, was described by the equation of Yamada et al. ( 1989) derived for bullfrog sympathetic
ganglion cells
(All)

and
a = 2.5 X 105* [Ca2’]i*exp(
p = 0.1

l exp(-V,/24)

V,/24)

(A 12)
w-u

where Ek was assumed to be - 105 mV, according to the data of
McCormick
and Prince ( 1987 ) . The maximal conductance for I,
was set to 1 ,uS, which is within the range proposed in other models
of Na+-dependent
action potentials (Belluzzi
and Sacchi 199 1;
Yamada et al. 1989). Intracellular recordings in vitro from thalamocortical relay neurons reveal that fast action potentials and
high threshold Ca2+ spikes are followed by substantial Ca2+-activated K+ currents, whereas low-threshold
Ca2+ spikes are not
(Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a,b; McCormick,
unpublished observations). In accordance with this data, we made I, sensitive to increases in Ca2+ concentration
resulting from IL, but not those
resulting from 1*. Recent immunological
studies have revealed
the spatial segregation of L-type channels in hippocampal pyramidal cells ( Westenbroek et al. 1990)) confirming at least the possibility that L- and T-type Ca2+ channels are segregated from one and
another in thalamic neurons and therefore may differentially activate Ca2+ -activated K+ currents.

W)

l/(a+P)

variable m of INa, a and ,6 were as follows

l ( V,

was described by
I Nap

1 >

The input capacitance (Gin) was set to 0.29 nF, as was measured
in a cat LGNd neuron that generated rhythmic burst firing and
that is illustrated in Fig. 8. In all equations voltage is in millivolts,
current is in nanoamperes, time is in milliseconds, conductance is
microsiemens (unless stated otherwise), concentration
is molar,
and volume is in liters.
The mathematical
description
of the different currents was
achieved either through a Hodgkin-Huxley
style derivation of forward and backward rate equations ( Hodgkin and Huxley 1952) or
through the mathematical description of the voltage dependence
of activation and inactivation and the kinetics of such. The equations for JA, JK2, &, and & were derived from voltage-clamp recordings of thalamocortical
relay neurons and are given in the
accompanying
paper (Huguenard
and McCormick
1992). The
range in maximal conductances for these four currents as observed in vitro and the values used in the present model are presented in Table 1. Here we present the equations for the description of JNa, 1&, , &, &, JKleak, and JNaleakand for Ca2+ buffering,
assuming a temperature of 23.5 “C.

INa

&,

Vm + 38)/5]}

(A-u

As with the low-threshold
Ca2+ current (Eq. 10 in Huguenard
and McCormick
1992)) the high-threshold
Ca2+ was modeled using the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz
constant field equation

CURRENT

IL = pLmax-m2-

EF2/RT*[[Ca2+]i

z2-

CLAMP

MODEL

- [Ca2’],.exp(-zFE/RT)]/
[ 1 - exp( -zFE/RT)]

(AM)

is the maximal permeability
(in cm3/ set), z is 2 for
where
PLmax
Ca2+, [ Ca2+], is determined by both Ir, and Jr, [ Ca2+], is 2.0 mM,
and E, F, R, and T have their usual meanings (Hille 1984).
The activation variable m was described according to the data of
Kay and Wong ( 1987) obtained from hippocampal
pyramidal
cells
cx = 1.6/{
,8 = 0.02*(

1 + exp[-0.072*(

V-

1.31)/

(exp[(

VV-

S.O)]}

1.31)/5.36]

(A15)
- l}

(A16)

In dissociated thalamocortical
relay cells, pL was generally twice
as large as pr. Therefore, because pr was set at 40 ( X 1Oe6 cm3/
set), pL was set to 80 ( X10e6 cm3/sec).

OF

THALAMIC

NEURONS

resting membrane potential
resistance of 138 MQ.

1399

of -95

mV and an apparent

input

We thank B. Strowbridge,
P. Majherate,
and G. Shepherd,
whose advice
made the present model of thalamic
neurons possible.
This work was supported
by National
Institute
of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke Grants NS-06477
and NS- 12 15 1 to D. A. Prince and
NS-26 143 to D. A. McCormick.
Additional
support was obtained from the
Sloan Foundation,
the Klingenstein
Fund, and the Jane and Peter Pattison
Fund.
Those interested
in obtaining
a copy of the modelling
program
and
instruction
manual should send a diskette and an address label to J. R.
Huguenard
or D. A. McCormick.
Address for reprint requests: D. A. McCormick,
Section of Neurobiology, SHM C303, Yale Medical
School, 333 Cedar St., New Haven,
CT
065 10.
Received

24 March

1992; accepted

in final

form

8 June 1992.

C’a 2+ bu$h?ng
Calcium concentrations were calculated in the inner 100 nm of
cytoplasm just beneath the membrane area of 29,000 pm2. In this
simulation,
we adopted the simple proportional
model of Ca2+
diffusion out of this space used by Traub ( 1982) in the modeling
of hippocampal
pyramidal cells. In this model, the change in
[ Ca2+li is described by
d[Ca2+]/dt

The concentration
cording to
[Ca2+lI

= [Ca2+lt-i

= P=[Ca2’]

WV

of Ca2+ at time step t was then calculated
+ At*([-5.18

X IO-“*&-

or

(area-depth)

ac-

I=)]/

- ,&[Ca2f]t-I>

(AH)

where the constant -5.18 X 10v3 is used to convert current (in
nanoamperes),
time (in milliseconds),
and volume (in cubic micrometers) to concentration
of Ca2+ ions and is derived from
1 nA = 1 X lo-l2
1 liter

Coulombs/msec

= 1 X 10 I5 pm3

and Faraday’s constant of 1.92988 X lo5 coulombs
per
mole Ca2+.
The minimal [ Ca2+]i was set to 50 nM. The low-threshold
and
high-threshold
Ca 2+ currents were treated separately.
The diffusion rate constant p was adjusted so as to replicate the
duration of the AHP after a single action potential ( ~60 ms). A
value for ,B of 1 was used in these simulations at 355 “C.

I Kleak

and

INaleak

The leak conductances gKleak and &&.& were considered
linear leak conductances and were described by
I Kleak

=

gKleak

I Naleak

=

gNaleak

’ cE

l

tE

-

EK)
-

ENa

to be

WV
>

ww

The maximal conductances gU& and &&.ak were adjusted to
match the resting membrane potential and apparent input conductance of guinea pig or cat LGNd that was being modeled. In
the modeling of guinea pig neurons, this resulted in a gUeak of 15
of 6 nS (see RESULTS).
In the modeling of the
nS and
a gNaleak
oscillating cat LGNd neuron, two properties of this cell were considered: 1) after the block of & with the local application of Cs+,
the resting membrane potential of this cell was approximately
-85
mV and the apparent input resistance was 150 MQ. In the present
model, g&& was set to 7 nS and gN&& was set to 0.25 nS, giving a

REFERENCES

BELLUZZI, 0. AND SACCHI, 0. The interactions

between potassium
and
action potentials
in the rat sympathetic
J. Physiol. Lond. 397: 127-147, 1988.
BELLUZZI, 0. AND SACCHI, 0. A five-conductance
model of the action
potential
in rat sympathetic
neuron. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 55: l-30,
1991.
BLOOMFIELD, S. A., HAMOS, J. E., AND SHERMAN, S. M. Passive cable
properties
and morphological
correlates of neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. J. Physiol. Lond. 383: 653-692, 1987.
COENEN, A. M. L. AND VENDRIK, A. J. H. Determination
of the transfer
ratio of cat’s geniculate
neurons through
quasi-intracellular
recordings
and the relation with the level of alertness. Exp. Brain Res. 14: 227-242,
1972.
COULTER, D.A., HUGUENARD, J.R., ANDPRINCE, D.A.Calciumcurrents
in rat thalamocortical
relay neurons:
kinetic properties
of the transient,
low-threshold
current.
J. Physiol. Lond. 4 14: 587-604,
1989.
CRUNELLI, V., LIGHTOWLER, S., AND POLLARD, C. E. A T-type Ca2+
current underlies low-threshold
Ca2+ potentials in cells of the cat and rat
lateral geniculate
nucleus. J. Physiol. Lond. 4 13: 543-56 1, 1989.
CURRY)DOSSI, R., NUNEZ, A., AND STERIADE, M. Electrophysiology
of a
slow intrinsic oscillation
in thalamocortical
cells of cat in vivo. J. Physiol. Lond. In press. 199 1.
DESCH~NES,M., PARADIS, M., ROY, J.P., ANDSTERIADE, M.Electrophysiology of neurons
of lateral thalamic
nuclei in rat: resting properties
and burst discharges.
J. Neurophysiol. 5 1: 1196-12 19, 1984.
DEXTEXHE, A. AND BABLOYANTZ, A. Cortical coherent activity induced
by thalamic
oscillations.
In: Complex Dynamics in Neural Networks,
edited by J. Taylor. New York: Springer-Verlag,
199 1.
DIFRANCESCO, D. The cardiac hyperpolarizing-activated
current
If: origins and developments.
Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 46: 163-183, 1985.
DIFRANCESCO, D. The contribution
of the “pacemaker”
current (if) to
generation
of spontaneous
activity in rabbit sino-atria1 node myocytes.
J. Physiol. Land. 434: 23-40, 199 1.
DIFRANCESCO,D., DUCOURET, P., ANDROBINSON, R.B.Muscarinicmodulation
of cardiac rate at low acetylcholine
concentrations.
Science
Wash. DC 243: 669-67 1, 1989.
DIFRANCESCO, D. AND NOBLE, D. A model of cardiac electrical activity
incorporating
ionic pumps and concentration
changes. Philos. Trans. R.
Sot. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 307: 353-398, 1985.
DIFRANCESCO,D. AND NOBLE, D. Current I, and its contribution
to cardiac pacemaking.
In: Neuronal and Cellular Oscillators, edited by J. W.
Jacklet. New York: Dekker,
1989, p. 3 l-57.
DIFRANCESCO, D. AND TORTORA, P. Direct activation
of cardiac pacemaker channels by intracellular
cyclic AMP. Nature Land. 35 1: 145147, 1991.
FRENCH,~. R., SAH, P., BUCKETT, K.J., AND GAGE, P. W. A voltage-dependent
persistent
sodium current
in mammalian
hippocampal
neurons. J. Gen. Physiol. 95: 1139-l 157, 1990.
HAMILL,~. P., HUGUENARD, J.R., ANDPRINCE, D.A.Patch-clampstudies of voltage-gated
currents
in identified
neurons
of the rat cerebral
cortex. Cerebral Cortex 1: 48-6 1, 199 1.
sodium
neuron.

currents

in generating

1400

D. A. MCCORMICK

AND J. R. HUGUENARD

A. AND PAPE, H.-C. Identification of two calcium
currents in acutely dissociated neurons from the rat lateral geniculate
nucleus. J. Neurophys. 61: 1270-1283, 1989.
HILLE, B. Ionic channels of excitable membranes. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer, 1984.
HIRSCH, J. C., FOURMENT,
A., AND MARC, M. E. Sleep-related variations
of membrane potential in the lateral geniculate body relay neurons of
the cat. Brain Res. 259: 308-312, 1983.
HODGKIN,
A. L. AND HUXLEY, A. F. A quantitive description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve.
J. Physiol. Land. 117: 500-544, 1952.
HUGUENARD,
J. R., COULTER, D. A., AND PRINCE, D. A. A fast transient
potassium current in thalamic relay neurons: kinetics of activation and
inactivation. J. Neurophysiol. 66: 1304- 13 15, 199 1.
HUGUENARD,
J. R., HAMILL, 0. P., AND PRINCE, D. A. Developmental
changes in Na+ conductances in rat neocortical neurons: appearance of
a slowly inactivating component. J. Neurophysiol. 59: 778-795, 1988.
HUGUENARD,
J. R. AND MCCORMICK,
D. A. Simulation of the currents
involved in rhythmic oscillations in thalamic relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 68: 1373- 1383, 1992.
HUGUENARD,
J. R. AND PRINCE, D. A. Slow inactivation of a TEA-sensitive K current in acutely isolated rat thalamic relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 66: 1316-1328, 1991.
JAHNSEN, H. AND LLIN~S, R. Electrophysiological properties of guineapig thalamic neurons: an in vitro study. J. Physiol. Land. 349: 205-226,
1984a.
JAHNSEN, H. AND LLIN&
R. Ionic basis for the electroresponsiveness and
oscillatory properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurons in vitro. J. Physiol. Lond. 349: 227-247, 1984b.
KAY, A. R. AND WONG, R. K. S. Calcium current activation kinetics in
isolated pyramidal neurons of the CA 1 region of the mature guinea-pig
hippocampus. J. Physiol. Lond. 392: 603-6 16, 1987.
LANCASTER, B. AND NICOLL, R. A. Properties of two calcium-activated
hyperpolarizations in rat hippocampal neurons. J. Physiol. Lond. 389:
187-203, 1987.
LERESCHE, N., LIGHTOWLER,
S., SOLTESZ, I., JASSIK-GERSCHENFELD,
D.,
AND CRUNELLI,
V. Low frequency oscillatory activities intrinsic to rat
and cat thalamocortical cells. J. Physiol. Lond. 44 1: 155- 174, 199 1.
LIVINGSTONE,
M. S. AND HUBEL, D. H. Effects of sleep and arousal on the
processing of visual information in the cat. Nature Land. 29 1: 554-56 1,
1981.
MADISON,
D. V. AND NICOLL, R. A. Control of repetitive discharge of rat
CA 1 pyramidal neurons in vitro. J. Physiol. Lond. 354: 3 19-33 1, 1984.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. Functional properties of a slowly inactivating potassium current IAs in guinea pig dorsal lateral geniculate relay neurons. J.
Neurophysiol. 66: 1176- 1189, 199 1.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. Cellular mechanisms underlying cholinergic and noradrenergic modulation of neuronal firing mode in the cat and guinea pig
dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Neurosci. 12: 278-289, 1992a.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. Neurotransmitter actions in the thalamus and cerebral cortex and their role in neuromodulation of thalamocortical activity. Prog. Neurobiol. 39: 337-388, 1992b.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND FEESER, H. R. Functional implications of burst
firing and single spike activity lateral geniculate relay neurons. Neuroscience 39: 103- 113, 1990.
MCCORMICK,
D. A., HUGUENARD,
H., AND STROWBRIDGE, B. Determination of state dependent processing in thalamus by single neuron properties and neuromodulators. In: Single Neuron Computation, edited by T.
McKenna, J. Davis, and S. F. Zornetzer. San Diego: Academic. 1992.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND PAPE, H.-C. Properties of a hyperpolarization-activated cation current and its role in rhythmic oscillation in thalamic
relay neurons. J. Physiol. Lond. 43 1: 291-318, 1990a.
HERN~NDEZ-CRUZ,

D. A. AND PAPE, H.-C. Noradrenergic and serotonergic
modulation of a hyperpolarization-activated cation current in thalamic
relay neurons. J. Physiol. Lond. 43 1: 3 19-342, 1990b.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND PRINCE, D. A. Noradrenergic modulation of
firing pattern in guinea pig and cat thalamic neurons, in vitro. J. Neurophysiol. 59: 978-996, 1988.
MCMULLEN,
T. A. AND LY, N. Model of oscillatory activity in thalamic
neurons: role of voltage- and calcium-dependent ionic conductances.
Biol. Cybern. 58: 243-259, 1988.
MONTERO,
V. M. A quantitative study of synaptic contacts on interneurons and relay cells of the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. Exp. Brain Res.
86: 257-270, 1991.
PAPE, H. C. Adenosine promotes burst firing activity in guinea pig geniculocortical neurons through two different mechanisms. J. Physiol. Land.
447: 729-753, 1992.
PENNEFATHER,
P., LANCASTER, B., ADAMS, P. R., AND NICOLL, R. A. TWO
distinct Ca-dependent K currents in bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cells.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82: 3040-3044, 1985.
ROSE, R. M. AND HINDMARSH,
J. L. A model of a thalami neuron. Proc. R.
Sot. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 225: 161-193, 1985.
ROSE, R. M. AND HINDMARSH,
J. L. The assembly of ionic currents in a
thalamic neuron. I-III. Proc. R. Sot. Land. B Biol. Sci. 237: 267-334,
1989.
RUDY, B. Diversity and ubiquity of K channels. Neuroscience 25: 729749, 1988.
SHERMAN, S. M. AND KOCH, C. The control of retinogeniculate transmission in the mammalian lateral geniculate nucleus. Exp. Brain Res. 63:
l-20, 1986.
SOLTESZ, I., LIGHTOWLER,
S., LERESCHE, N., JASSIK-GERSCHENFELD,
D.,
POLLARD, C. E., AND CRUNELLI,
V. Two inward currents and the transformation of low frequency oscillations of rat and cat thalamocortical
cells. J. Physiol. Lond. 441: 175-197, 199 1.
STERIADE, M., CURRY DOSSI, R., AND NUNEZ, A. Network modulation of
a slow intrinsic oscillation of cat thalamocortical neurons implicated in
sleep delta waves: cortical potentiation and brainstem suppression. J.
Neurosci. 11: 3200-32 17, 199 1.
STERIADE, M. AND DESCH~NES, M. The thalamus as a neuronal oscillator.
Brain Res. Rev. 8: l-63, 1984.
STERIADE, M. AND LLIN~S, R. R. The functional states of the thalamus
and the associated neuronal interplay. Physiol. Rev. 68: 649-742, 1988.
STERIADE, M. AND MCCARLEY,
R. W. Brainstem Control of Wakefullness
and Sleep. New York: Plenum, 1990.
STORM, J. F. Action potential repolarization and a fast after-hyperpolarization in rat hippocampal pyramidal cells. J. Physiol. Lond. 385: 733-759,
1987.
STORM, J. F. Potassium currents in hippocampal pyramidal cells. Prog.
Brain Res. 83: 161-187, 1990.
TRAUB, R. D., WONG, R. K. S., MILES, R., AND MICHELSON,
H. A model
of a CA3 hippocampal pyramidal neuron incorporating voltage-clamp
data on intrinsic conductances. J. NeurophysioZ. 66: 635-650, 199 1.
YAMADA,
W. M., KOCH, C., AND ADAMS, P. Multiple channels and calcium dynamics. In: Methods in Neuronal Modeling. From Synapses to
Networks, edited by C. Koch and I. Segev. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1989, p. 97-133.
WANG, X.-J., RINZEL, J., AND ROGAWSISI, M. A. A model of the T-type
calcium current and the low threshold spike in thalamic neurons. J.
Neurophysiol. 66: 839-850, 199 1.
WESTENBROEK,
R. E., AHLIJANIAN,
M. K., AND CATTERALL, W. A. Clustering 0 f L-type Ca2+ channels at the base of major dendrites in hippocampal pyramidal neurons. Natu re Lond. 347: 28 l-284, 1990.
MCCORMICK,

