The Journal of Neuroscience,

In Viva, ln V&o, and Computational
Analysis
Currents in Thalamic Reticular Neurons
Alain Destexhe,‘,’

Diego

Contreras,

* Mircea

Steriade,*

Terrence

January

of Dendritic

J. Sejnowski,lr3

1, 1996, 16(1):169-185

Calcium

and John R. Huguenard4

l The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk Institute for Biological
Studies, Computational Neurobiology Laboratory,
La Jolla, California 92037, 2Laboratoire de Neurophysiologie, Faculte de Medecine, Universite Lava/, Quebec, Canada
Gl K 7P4, 3Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92037, and Qepartment of
Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, California 94305

Thalamic reticular (RE) neurons are involved in the genesis of
synchronized thalamocottical
oscillations, which depend in part
on their complex bursting properties. We have investigated the
intrinsic properties
of RE cells using computational
models
based on morphological
and electrophysiological
data. Simulations of a reconstructed
RE cell were compared directly with
recordings from the same cell to obtain precise values for the
passive parameters.
In a first series of experiments,
the lowthreshold calcium current (ITS) was studied via voltage clamp in
acutely dissociated
RE cells that lack most of their dendrites.
Simulations
based on a cell with truncated
dendrites
and
Hodgkin-Huxley
kinetics reproduced
these recordings
with a
relatively low density of I,. In a second series of experiments,
voltage-clamp
recordings obtained in intact RE cells in slices
showed a higher amplitude and slower kinetics of I,. These

Thalamic reticular (RE) neuronsare strategicallylocated to receive collateralsfrom most thalamocortical and corticothalamic
fibers. RE neuronstypically fire burstsof action potentialsduring
synchronized sleep or anesthesia(Steriade et al., 1986), and a
low-thresholdCa2+current, I,,, underliesthe production of these
bursts(Llinas and Geijo-Barrientos,1988;Huguenardand Prince,
1992;Bal and McCormick, 1993).Together with similar bursting
properties in thalamocortical (TC) relay cells,the TC-RE reciprocal interaction is central to the genesisof various types of
synchronizedoscillationsand epileptic behavior (Steriade et al.,
1993; von Krosigk et al., 1993; Huguenard and Prince, 1994;
Warren et al., 1994).
The bursts in RE cells differ from those in TC cells in several
ways. First, RE cells typically produce broad bursts which
develop more slowly than in TC cells (Mulle et al., 1986;
Steriade et al., 1986;Llinas and Geijo-Barrientos, 1988).This is
corroborated by the slower activation and inactivation kinetics
of the T-current in these neurons (Huguenard and Prince,
1992). Second, relatively strong current pulses need to be
injected to evoke bursts in RE cells compared with TC cells
(Mulle et al., 1986;Bal and McCormick, 1993;Contreras et al.,
1993), suggestingthat I, is located in the dendrites. Third, the
pattern of sodiumspikeswithin a burst typically increasesthen
Received
May 24, 1995; revised Sept. 15, 1995; accepted
Sept. 20, 1995.
This research was supported
by The Howard
Hughes Medical
Institute,
National
Institutes
of Health (NINDS
Grant NS06477),
and The Medical
Research
Council
of
Canada. We acknowledge
Dr. D. Amaral
for the use of his neuron
tracing system.
Correspondence
should be addressed
to Dr. A. Destexhe,
Department
of Physiology, Lava1 University
School of Medicine,
Quebec,
Canada
GlK 7P4.
Copyright
0 1995 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/95/160169-17$0500/O

properties
could be reproduced
from the reconstructed
cell
model assuming higher densities of I, in distal dendrites. In a
third series of experiments,
current-clamp
recordings
were
obtained in RE cells in viva. The marked differences with in vitro
recordings
could be reconciled
by simulating synaptic bombardment in the dendrites of RE cells, but only if they contained
high distal densities of I,. In addition, simpler models with as
few as three compartments
could reproduce the same behavior
show
assuming dendritic I,. These models and experiments
how intrinsic bursting properties of RE cells, as recorded in vivo
and in vitro, may be explained by dendritic calcium currents.
Key words: sleep; synchronized
oscillations; voltage clamp;
bursting; intrinsic electrophysiological
properties;
multicompartment models; low-threshold
calcium current

decreasesin frequency (Domich et al., 1986; Avanzini et al.,
1989; Contreras et al., 1993;Huguenard and Prince, 1994; Bal
et al., 1995).This accelerando-decelerandopattern isroutinely
used as a criterion to recognize RE cells from extracellular
recordings (Steriade et al., 1986). Fourth, in RE cells recorded
in viva, the burst develops gradually (Contreras et al., 1993),
unlike the all-or-none properties seenin TC cells.
Computationalstudiesof RE cellsthus far have beenbasedon
single-compartmentmodelscontaining I, as well as other currents identified in RE cells. Some of these modelssuccessfully
account for the rhythmicity generated within the RE nucleus
(Destexhe and Babloyantz, 1992; Wang and Rinzel, 1993;Destexhe et al., 1994a;Golomb et al., 1994;Wallenstein, 1994)and
the rhythmic@ occurring from the interaction between TC and
RE cells (Destexhe et al., 1993), but none of them accurately
reproduceall of the propertiesenumeratedabove.
The primary hypothesistested in this paper, using computational models combined with in vivo and in vitro intracellular
recordingsof RE cells, was that the majority of the T-current
arisesin the dendrites,as proposedby Mulle et al. (1986). Dendritic calciumcurrents already have been usedto model burstsof
action potentialsin hippocampal(Traub et al., 1991)and neocortical pyramidal cells (Traub, 1979;Rhodesand Gray, 1994) but
these have not been constraineddirectly by recordingsfrom the
samereconstructedcells. Basedon voltage-clamprecordingsof
RE cells with and without dendrites, and morphologically accurate modelsof thesecells,we showhow dendritic I, can account
for all voltage-clampdata. We alsoshow that sustainedsynaptic
currents in the dendritescan simulatethe properties of RE cells

170

J. Neurosci..

January

1, 1996,

16(1):169-185

as seen from in vivo recordings, only if the major portion of ITS is
dendritic.
Some of the results of the present paper appeared as an
abstract (Sejnowski et al., 1995).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
We focus here on neurons from the somatosensory sector of the thalamic
reticular nucleus. All in vitro recordings were obtained from RE neurons
in young rats (P8-P15), using either intact slice preparation or acutely
dissociated cells. Details of the methods used were described by
Huguenard and Prince (1992,1994). I n viva recordings were performed in
the somatosensory and more rostra1 sectors of the RE nucleus in adult
cats anesthetized with pentobarbital or urethane. The methods were
described in detail by Contreras et al. (1993).
An RE neuron was recorded in intact slice preparation (reticular sector
of the ventrobasal thalamus in rat) and stained with biocytin. The cell was
shown in Figure 1 of Huguenard and Prince (1992). We reconstructed the
morphology of the cell from serial sections of 80 hrn, using a computerized-tracing system (Eutectic Electronics, Raleigh, NC) kindly provided
bv Prof. D. Amaral (Universitv of California. Davis). With the 100x
objective used, and correction for tissue shrinkage, the theoretical accuracy with which dendritic diameters can be measured was 0.1 pm. The
neuron traced is shown in Figure L4.
There were four primary dendrites, having a total length of 3785 pm;
the total membrane area of the cell was 15,115.5 pm*, including 1760 pm*
for the soma, which was -20-25 pm in diameter. The dendritic arborizations tended to spread in planes parallel to the long axis of the nucleus,
as described previously by Ramon y Cajal (1909).
The morphology of the RE cell was incorporated into NEURON,
which can simulate the cable geometry from the three-dimensional coordinates provided by the tracing of the neuron (for more details, see

Intact

cell

Destexhe

et al.

Dendritically

l

Generated

Bursts

in Thalamic

RE Neurons

Hines, 1989). The two equivalent cable models studied had either 80 or
230 compartments and gave identical results.
In acutely dissociated cells, most of the dendritic arborizations were
removed by the dissociation procedure (see Fig. 2 of Huguenard and
Prince, 1992). Simulations of acutelv dissociated RE cells used a cable
geometry obtained by truncating the dendrites of the original cell (Fig.
1B). The model shown in Figure 1B had only the soma and the most
proximal parts of dendrites (8 compartments), with a total membrane
area of 3639 pm’. The input capacitance of this model was similar to, but
slightly larger than, that measured from dissociated RE cells (Huguenard
and Prince, 1992).
A procedure was developed, based on a simplex algorithm (Press et al.,
1986), for fitting the simulations to experimental data to find optimal
values for passive parameters. At each iteration of the simplex algorithm,
the model was run and the squared error between the experimental
recording and the model was minimized. This procedure was repeated
from different initial conditions to avoid unstable values of parameters.
The values of passive parameters were considered uniform and were
consistent with the values estimated from the recordings. Approximately
1.50-450 iterations were required to converge to a minimum error.
For the cell shown in Figure L4, voltage-clamp recordings were obtained in the same cell. We used these recordings to estimate the passive
parameters by fitting the model to the data (Fig. 24). It has been shown
that when the cable geometry of the cell is known, this procedure should
lead to a unique set of parameter values if they are uniform (Rail et al.,
1992), which was the case here. A direct fit to current-clamp recording
was not performed here, because the model included only a subset of the
currents present in these cells.
Voltage-dependent conductances were modeled using a HodgkinHuxley type of kinetic model (Hodgkin and Huxley, 1952). The Na+ and
K+ currents responsible for fast action potentials were inserted in the
soma, and their kinetics was taken from a model of hippocampal pyramidal cells (Traub and Miles, 1991), assuming a resting potential of -67
mV in their equations, maximal conductances of & = 100 mS/cm’
and & = 80 mS/cm*, and reversal potentials of E,, = 50 mV and E, =
- 100 mV.
The kinetics of activation and inactivation of I, in RE cells, as well as
the activation curves of I,, obtained from voltage-clamp recordings in
acutely dissociated RE cells (Huguenard and Prince, 1992), were:

model
ITS

ril=

A=

=

gCa

-

&)

m2h

(v

(m

-

-

&a)

(1)

f%(V))

-

where gca (in mS/cm’) is the maximum value of the conductance of the
Ca*+ current. E,. is the Ca2+ reversal ootential. given bv the Nernst
relation (see below), and m and h are the activation and inactivation
variables, respectively. The expressions for steady-state activation and
inactivation functions obtained were (Huguenard and Prince, 1992):
LO

Y

m,(V)
k(V)

= l/(1 + exp[ - (V + 52)/7.4])
= I/(1 + exp[(V + 80)/5]),

and the voltage-dependent time constants were:
Dissociated

cell model

T,(V)
Q(V)

100 urn

Figure 1. A, Reconstructed RE cell from the ventrobasal sector of the
thalamic reticular nucleus of the rat. The cell was stained with biocytin
during recordings in intact slice preparation (Huguenard and Prince,
1992); reconstructed using a computerized tracing system and incorporated into the NEURON simulator. Models with either 80 or 230 compartments were used. B, Model of a dissociated RE cell, obtained by
removing most of the dendrites from the intact cell.

= 1 + 0.33/(exp[(V
= 28.3

+ 0.33/(exp[(V

+ 27)/10] + exp[ - (V + 102)/15])
+ 48)/4] + exp[ - (V + 407)/50])

as obtained from fitting the time constants measured from the same
experiments (see Results). These values correspond to a temperature of
36°C assuming Q,, values of 2.5 and an extracellular Ca*+ concentration
of 2 mM. Different densities of I, were used for the soma and the
dendrites.
Calcium handling was modeled by a first-order system representing
CaZt pumps and buffers, as in McCormick and Huguenard (1992), with
a time constant of decay of Ca *’ of 5 msec. The free intracellular Ca2+
concentration at equilibrium
was 240 nM, and the extracellular
Ca*+ concentration was 2 mM, corresponding to a reversal potential of
-+120 mV. As the intracellular Ca*+ concentration varied, the reversal potential was calculated using the Nernst relation. We compared
this assumption with constant field equations, which provides a better

Destexhe

et al. . Dendritically

Generated

Bursts in Thalamic

RE Neurons

J. Neurosci.,

January

1, 1996, 76(1):169-l&3

171

given by

A

r=

1

a
I 4

E
1-5

-1

Figure 2. Passive properties of thalamic reticular cells. A, Simplex fitting
of the multicompartment model to voltage-clamp recordings from the
same cell. (***u* ) -5 mV voltage-clamp step during 50 msec from a
holding potential of -80 mV (average of 8 traces). (-)
Best simulation
obtained after 450 iterations of the simplex procedure. At each iteration,
the same voltage-clamp protocol was simulated in the model cell and the
least-square error was computed between the simulation and the data.
The procedure was repeated until the model converged to a stable set of
values of the parameters from different initial conditions. Eighty or 230
compartments gave identical results. The best parameters were membrane
capacitance of 1.01 ? 0.01 pF/cm’, axial resistivity of 260 + 30 a/cm, leak
conductance of 0.05 t 0.0001 mS/cm*, and resting potential of -82.844 +
0.002 mV (mean values and SD obtained from different initial conditions;
ranges of values tested were 0.2-2 pF/cm*, 50-500 a/cm, 0.02-0.2 mS/
cm’, and -80 to -85 mV, respectively). B, Simplex fitting of a simplified
multicompartment model to voltage-clamp recordings of an RE cell. In
this case, the same parameters were used as in A, and only the dendritic
correction factor, C,, was fit. The optimal value obtained was C, = 3.69 2
0.01 (range tested 1.5-5). The least-square error was slightly higher
(cl%) than using the multicompartment model.

model for the nonlinear behavior of Ca*+ currents (Hille, 1992).
Simulations of either voltage clamp or current clamp did not reveal any
significant difference, even with high densities of Ca*+ channels, suggesting that details of Ca’+ handling had minimal effect on the model.
Finally, simplified models of RE cells with fewer compartments were
generated. The method used collapses several dendritic compartments
in an “equivalent cylinder,” based on the conservation of the axial
resistance (Bush and Sejnowski, 1993) rather than conservation of the
membrane area (see Rall, 1995). The axial resistance (R) of a cylindrical compartment is the product of its physical length by its axial
resistivity (Ri), divided by its section (Rall, 1995). Assuming Ri is
uniform, several cylindrical compartments of roughly identical physical
length are collapsed into an equivalent cylinder. If the cross-sectional
area of the equivalent cylinder equals the sum of each individual
cross-sectional areas, this is equivalent to summing parallel resistances
because l/r = Cj l/R(j), where RCj) is the axial resistance of the
collapsed compartments. The radius (r) of the equivalent cylinder is

, f-,,

(2)

where r, is the radius of collapsed compartments. The length is the
average of individual lengths. This method has the advantage of providing
the correct electrotonic attenuation along the dendritic tree, therefore
generating simple models that retain the synaptic and integrative properties of the neuron (Bush and Sejnowski, 1993).
Because the total membrane area is not conserved in this method, the
reduced model may not have a correct input resistance. This is compensated for by introducing in each equivalent cylinder a dendritic correction
factor (C,), which rescales the value of conductance (g,) and membrane
capacitance (C,,,) in the dendrites such that
g: = Cd gi,

20 Ins

2

a-

c:, = CdCn,.

(3)

If C, is estimated correctly, the reduced model will have the correct input
resistance and time constant (Bush and Sejnowski, 1993).
Although in principle C, is the ratio between the total surface area of
the dendritic segments and their equivalent cylinders (which was -2.5
here), a more accurate estimation of this factor was obtained by fitting
simulations of the reduced model directly to the voltage-clamp recordings
obtained in the cell (Fig. 2B). The other passive parameters were the
same as those obtained from fitting the detailed model to voltage-clamp
recordings.
The three compartments of the simplified model had the following
lengths (1) and diameters: 1 = 34.546 pm and diameter = 14.075 pm for
the soma (area of 1527.55 wm*); 1 = 103.24 wrn and diameter = 5.56 pm
for the proximal segment.(area of 1803.32 km*); 1 = 190.69 pm and
diameter = 3.06 pm for the distal segment (area of 3636.48 km*).
The single-compartment model had the same passive properties as
determined from voltage-clamp recordings using a model of the detailed
morphology and same kinetic parameters for I,, and Ca*+ decay. The
densities of currents used in three- and single-compartment models are
given in Results.
We used only one anatomically reconstructed RE cell in this study, in
addition to moroholoaicallv simolified models. The behavior of the detailed and simplified models weie nearly identical (see Results), which
suggests that the particular details of the morphology of the cell were not
important in the context of the present study. The behavior reported in
this paper was extremely robust to changes in the values of the parameters, as illustrated by the nearly identical behavior obtained in models
with different cable geometries.
All voltage-clamp and current-clamp simulations of the models were
done at 24 and 36”C, respectively.

RESULTS
We first present in vivo and in vitro intracellular

recordingsof
intrinsic burstsin RE cellsand describehow the modelwasfit to
the voltage-clampdata. We next examinecurrent-clamp recordings and investigate the conditions needed to produce bursting
behavior consistentwith experimental data.
RE cells in who and in vitro
The typical firing patterns of RE cells in viva are illustrated in
Figure 3. An RE neuron in a consciousanimalshowsa tonic firing
activity (Fig. 3A, top). During natural slow-wavesleep,the activity
of thalamic cells changesto more rhythmic firing and bursts of
action potentials(Steriade et al., 1986).The typical burstsof RE
cellsduring natural sleepshowan accelerando-decelerandopattern of action potentials(Fig. 3A, bottom). In intracellular recordings, it was possibleto elicit both modesof firing in RE cells,
depending on the membrane potential. Depolarizing current
pulsesfrom a level of -68 mV producedtonic firing, whereasthe
samepulse delivered at more hyperpolarized
levels elicited a burst
(Fig. 3B). In this cell, the burst showeda slowly risingphaseand
was broader than in TC cells, and there was always an accelerando-decelerandopattern of sodiumspikes,typical of RE cells
in unanesthetized,naturally sleepinganimals,aswell asin animals

172

J. Neurosci.,

A

January

1, 1996,

76(1):169-1-r

Destexhe

0.1 s
I

c,. ,, q’m-LI

I

50 ms

B

Dendritically

I(t) = A, exp( -

-95 mV
20 ms

Figure 3. Tonic and bursting firing in thalamic
reticular
neurons in vim.
A, RE neuron from the rostrolateral
sector was recorded extracellularly
in
an unanesthetized,
chronically
implanted
cat. The cell discharged
tonically
during the waking state (Wake),
with periods of sustained firing at frequencies between 20 and 60 Hz. During slow-wave
sleep (Sleep), the same
neuron
discharged
bursts of action potentials
that had a characteristic
accelerando-decelerando
pattern
at the core of the burst, reaching
frequencies of up to 400 Hz, followed by a tail of tonic discharge. This pattern
is characteristic
of RE cells in viva. B, Intracellular
recording
of an RE
neuron from the rostrolateral
sector in a urethane-anesthetized
cat. At
depolarized
membrane
potentials
(-68 mV), the cell responded
to depolarizing
square current
pulses with tonic discharges,
the frequencies
of
which were proportional to the amount of current injected. Upon DC

hyperpolarization (-95 mV), the same pulse gave rise to a passive re-

sponse.

Increasing

the

amount

of injected

current

triggered

bursts

of

action potentials that had a characteristic accelerando-decelerando pattern with

a longer

first interval

(see also Sleep burst

Generated

Bursts

in Thalamic

RE Neurons

Passive properties
In voltage-clamp mode, short voltage pulses were used to determine
the passive properties of the cell. Figure 24 shows the recordings of
capacitive transients in the same cell that was filled with biocytin and
reconstructed (Fig. L4). The current transients were not monoexponential and were well fit using two exponentials:

$8

a,

l

threshold for activation and its structure is relatively stereotyped
(Fig. 5). Both extracellular stimulation (Fig. 5A) and intracellular
injection of current pulses (Fig. SB) elicit stereotyped bursts with
a slow rising phase, an accelerando-decelerando pattern of sodium spikes, and a sharp threshold.
These comparisons reveal important similarities but also clear
differences in the electrophysiological properties of RE cells,
depending on the preparation, and between RE and TC cells. In
the following section, we investigate a detailed morphological
model of RE cells and show that their properties can be accounted
for by dendritic currents.

Wake

Sleep

et al.

in A).

under different anesthetics (Domich et al., 1986; Mulle et al.,
1986; Steriade et al., 1986; Contreras et al., 1993).
The bursting pattern of RE cells in viva can be activated
gradually (Contreras et al., 1993). In intracellular recordings from
three RE cells (Fig. 4), small-amplitude current pulses elicited a
passive response, whereas strong current pulses gave rise to a fully
developed burst, as in TC cells. However, pulses of intermediate
amplitude elicited active, embryonic bursts that did not develop
into a full burst response, unlike the characteristic all-or-none
behavior observed in TC cells.
In intracellular recordings of RE cells maintained in vitro, the
burst also shows a slowly rising phase, a relatively broad structure,
and an accelerando-decelerando pattern of sodium spikes, as
described in previous studies (Avanzini et al., 1989; Huguenard
and Prince, 1994; Bal et al., 1995). However, an important difference between in vivo and in vitro recordings is the all-or-none
nature of the burst. In rat thalamic slices, the burst has a clear

t/TJ

+ A2 exp( -

t/TJ,

(4)

whereA, = -11 pA, A, = -57 pA, T, = 12.9msec,and rz = 4.3
msec,leadingto an electrotonic length of L = 2.7 (seeRall, 1995).
The passivevalues measuredfrom these capacitive transients
were Ri, = 170 Ma and C = 69 pF. The capacitancewas
measuredby dividing the integrated charge by the voltage step.
This resulted in a specificcapacitanceof -0.5 kF/cm’, which is
low comparedwith the typical value of 1 pF/cm’ (seeRall et al.,
1992).The strong nonisopotentiality of the cell (estimatedL >
2.5) together with a high series resistancecould explain this
discrepancy.
In current clamp, the time course of voltage transients in
responseto small current pulseswas monoexponentialwith a
membranetime constant of T,, = 23 ? 1 msec.Based on our
estimateof L and time constantsof capacitive current transients
in voltage clamp (see above), the predicted value of the membrane time constantwould be T m = 17.3msec(seeRall, 1995).If
this neuron is representative, then the disagreementbetween
thesetwo valuesindicatesthat Rail’s equivalentcylinder modelis
inadequateto describeRE neurons.
We alsoobtained the passiveparametersby fitting the simulations of the multicompartment model directly to the recordings
obtained in the samecell. The results are shownin Figure 2A.
From several initial conditions, the model alwaysconvergedtoward similarvalues,suggestingthat only a singleset of parameters
can match this recordingusingthe geometry of the cell. The input
resistance(Rin) valuesobtained from the optimal passiveparameters were 141-146Ma with axial resistivitiesbetween200 and
300R/cm; the membranetime constantwas20 msec,and the total
capacitance(C) was -151 pF.
The axial resistivity between 200 and 300 a/cm is high compared with the values of -70 R/cm measuredin mammalian
neurons
(Barrett
and Crill,
1974). However,
the latter is probably
an underestimate(seeRall et al., 1992),and our result is consis-

tent with the 100-300an/cmrangefor axial resistivity obtainedby
matchingdetailed modelsto experimentaldata in other cell types
(Cauller and Connors, 1992;Stratford et al., 1992; Major et al.,
1994;Rapp et al., 1994).
The seriesresistancewas simulatedby including a resistance
betweenthe cell and the voltage source(voltage-clampamplifier)
and wasincludedasone of the parametersof the fitting procedure.
The bestfit shownin Figure24 could be obtainedonly usingrather

Destexhe

et al.

l

Dendritically

Generated

Bursts

in Thalamic

RE Neurons

J. Neurosci.,

January

1, 1996,

76(1):169-185

173

A2

50 ms

C

B
0.6
0.5
0.4

. ..

-----T,

nA
nA
nA

... . . .. ... ..
I
20

ms

20

ms

Figure 4. Burst discharges may occur in a graded fashion in RE cells in viva. Three different cells from the rostrolateral sector of the cat RE nucleus
were recorded in vivo under urethane anesthesia. A, Injection of square current puises of identical length and increasing amplitudes. Injection of long
pulses (Al) revealed gradually stronger bursts with shorter latencies; pulses of shorter duration (A2) evoked a burst of strength proportional to the pulse
intensity. In both cases, there was a hyperpolarizing DC current bringing the membrane potential to -90 mV. B, In a different cell, depolarizing current
pulses of increasing amplitudes applied at -87 mV elicit a burst with a growing number of spikes. C, The same progressive increase of spike number in
a burst shown in a different cell. The pulse protocols and the membrane potential are indicated in the inset.

highseriesresistance
(20-50 Ma), whichisconsistentwith the value
measuredduring the recording.The modelfit the nonisopotentiality
of the cell aswell. The valuesobtainedusingthis procedurewere
self-consistent
with eachother, and theywerealsoin agreementwith
the passiveparametersobtainedfrom RE cellsin differentpreparations (Avanzini et al., 1989;Huguenardand Prince, 1992;Bal and
McCormick, 1993; Huguenard and Prince, 1994; Warren et al.,
1994).We usedthesevaluesasthe basisfor the passivepropertiesof
the RE cell in the modelspresentedhere.

Localization of the T-current
The kinetic parametersusedfor modelingI,, were obtainedfrom
voltage-clamp experiments on acutely dissociated RE cells
(Huguenard and Prince, 1992). They were best describedby a
Hodgkin-Huxley formalism with two activation gates and one
inactivation gate, for which the voltage-dependent parameters
were obtained by fitting exponential expressionsto the values
determinedexperimentally (seebelow).

174

J. Neurosci.,

January

1, 1996,

16(1):169-165

A

t::L200
Ins
-70mv
+ -!---

1

F@re 5. Bursting behavior in intracellularly recorded thalamic reticular
cells in vitro. A, Bursts obtained from a rat RE cell after extracellular
stimulation in an intact slice from the ventrobasal sector of the RE
nucleus. Successive stimulations (indicated by bars) were of 100 PA
intensity and 40, 60,80, 100, 150, 200, and 250 psec duration (from left to
right). The burst evoked had a threshold andwas all-or-none.
Thebottom
trace indicates a burst with 10 times faster time scale. B, Burst obtained
after intracellular injection of depolarizing current pulses. The amplitudes
of the pulses were 100, 200, 300, 400, and 500 pA, respectively (from left
to right). The bursts evoked for the strongest stimuli had a clear threshold for
activation, as in thalamocortical cells (Jahnsen and LlinL, 1984); they only
differed in the number of spikes produced after the burst. The bottom trace
shows the first burst with 5 times faster time scale. In all cases,the bursts of
RE cells had a slow rising phase and sodium spikes within a burst showed a
typical accelerando-decelerando pattern. All recordings were at 34°C.
In acutely dissociatedcells,the total I, current showeda low
peak amplitude at -130 pA (Fig. 6A) (Huguenard and Prince,
1992).Simulationsof steady-stateactivation and inactivation protocols captured the main featuresof ITSin RE cells,namely (1) a
relatively slowinactivation of this current comparedwith TC cells,
(2) a nearly voltage-independentrate of inactivation, and (3) an
activation voltage range that is more depolarized than TC cells.
Simulatedsteady-stateinactivation of ITSis shownin Figure 6B.
The values for the activation (TV) and inactivation (TV) time
constantsof I, are shownin Figure 6C,LI (seealso Fig. 6CJ of
Huguenard and Prince, 1992). The best fit of these values assumeda voltage dependencedescribedby biexponential expressions(seeMaterials and Methods) and is shownin Figure 6C,LI
(seealso Destexheet al., 1994a).
No changein the kinetics of the T-current wasneededto match
the voltage-clampdata usingthe modelof the dissociatedRE cell

Destexhe

et al. . Dendritically

Generated

Bursts

in Thalamic

RE Neurons

shown in Figure 1B. Only the density of T-channelshad to be
adjustedaccordingly: for a uniform density, the best fit was obtained with 0.045mS/cm’ (Fig. 6), independentlyof the particular
details of the morphology chosento represent dissociatedRE
cells. However, if I, was located only in the soma using the
geometry of Figure lB, the density needed to match the same
recordingswas 0.1 mS/cm*.
The valuesof I, density from the dissociatedcell model were
then introduced in the modelwith an intact cell morphology.Both
a uniform density of 0.045 mS/cm’ (Fig. 7, left) and a somatic
density of 0.1 mS/cm*,although giving rise to a total current of
-500 pA, failed to produce bursts in current-clamp mode. The
densityof I, had to be about an order of magnitudehigher than
thesevalues to elicit bursts:the threshold density for burst generation was -0.3 mS/cm’ for a uniform density and -3 mS/cm’
for a somaticdensity (no I, in the dendrites). This wasthe case
for burstsgeneratedusingeither depolarizing or hyperpolarizing
current pulses.However, these densities,as well as the current
amplitude in voltage clamp, are inconsistentwith the recordings
from acutely dissociatedcells.
One possiblewayto accountfor the differencesbetweencurrent
clamp in intact cells and voltage clamp in dissociatedcells is to
assumea high densityof I, in the distal dendrites.We considered
a uniform density of 0.045 mS/cm* in the soma and proximal
dendrites,consistentwith dissociatedcells,and a higherdensity in
distal dendrites (drawn in black in Fig. 7, right). Under these
conditions, the minimal distal density for burst generation was
-0.5 mS/cm*.With distally locatedI, (0.5-l mS/cm*),and in the
absenceof I,,, the amplitude of the low-threshold spike (8-20
mV; data not shown) was consistentwith the amplitudesseen
experimentally in RE neuronsafter application of tetrodotoxin
(Avanzini et al., 1989;Bal et al., 1993).
Properties of dendritically generated bursts
A distal localization of the T-current hasan important impact on
the properties of burst generation in RE cells. We studiedhere
the properties of theseburstsassumingthe sameIT, density asin
Figure 7 (left). After a brief pulse of hyperpolarizing current, a
broad calcium spike appearedin distal dendrites(Fig. S), which
then elicited sodium spikesin the soma.During the burst, as
shownby the successive
snapshotsand dendritic potential profiles
in Figure 8, the membranepotential remainedhigh in the distal
part of the dendritic tree, “feeding” the somawith current. The
sodiumspikeswere generatedin the somaand spreadonly into
proximal dendritic segments.Becauseof the low-passfiltering
properties of the dendritic tree, the slow calcium spike has a
strong effect in the soma,whereasthe backward propagation of
the higher frequency sodium spikes is limited. We have not
included dendritic sodium currents here, which might affect the
dendritic propagation of action potentials (Huguenard et al.,
1989;Stuart and Sakmann,1994;Mainen et al., 1995).
With distal I,, the simulated bursts showed accelerandodecelerandopatternsof sodiumspikes,typical of RE cells(Figs. 7,
8). The samepatterns also persistedafter shifting the voltage
dependenceof I,, and I, currents toward more depolarized or
hyperpolarized levels (data not shown), suggestingthat these
currents were not responsiblefor the accelerando-decelerando,
but that the slowrisingand decayingphasesof the burst were the
determiningfactors.
Further observationssupport the presenceof I, in the dendrites. First, recordingsof intact RE cells in slicesshow a much
higher peak amplitude of the current than in acutely dissociated

Destexhe

et al. . Dendritically

Generated

Bursts in Thalamic

RE Neurons

J. Neurosci.,

January

1, 1996, 16(1):169-185

175

1 second
-40 mV
-110 mV

3

Acutely

A

dissociated
50
40
1

f

0 I

120 ms

-120

I
-100

-80
V

-40

-20

-40

-20

(mv)

D

Simulated

!

-80

800

-

700

-

800

-

';;

500

-

5

400

-

I$

300

-

200

-

100

-

100 ms
-120

-100

-80
V

-60
OW

6. Steady-state
inactivation protocol of I, under voltage clamp. The voltage protocol is depicted at the top: the holding potential was set for 1
set, followed by a 10 msec hyperpolarization to -110 mV that preceded the depolarizing command to -30 mV. A, Inactivation protocol of the low
threshold Ca*+ current I,, in an acutely dissociated rat RE cell (from Huguenard and Prince, 1992). The currents shown were obtained with
depolarizations to -30 mV from different holding potentials. B, Simulations of the same inactivation protocols using the cell shown in Figure 1B; the
density of I,, was estimated as 0.045 mS/cm* (kinetics from Destexhe et al., 1994a). I,, was located uniformly in the cell, and the density of channels was
adjusted to match the amplitude of the currents recorded in dissociated cells. C, Fit of the voltage dependence of time constants of activation (T,,). D,
Fit of the inactivation time constant (TJ. For both C and D, the data were from acutely dissociated RE cells (circles are mean values, and vertical bars
are SEM) at 24°C (Huguenard and Prince, 1992). Solid lines show the best fit obtained using exponential expressions (Destexhe et al., 1994a) (given in
Materials and Methods).

Figure

cells (see Fig. 9). Although most of the T-channels would be
inactivated at the holding potential used (-71 mV in Fig. 9B,
left), the current evoked with stepsto -46 mV is much larger
than the fully inactivated current obtained with a similar command potential (-40 mV in Fig. 9B, right) in a dissociated
neuron. In the model, a high density of I, in distal dendrites
reproduced the higher amplitude of the current seen in the
soma (-2 nA; Fig. 7) compared with dissociatedcells (-150
pA; Fig. 6B).
Second,voltage-clampcontrol is extremely difficult to obtain in
intact RE cells.Occasionally,with either appropriatevoltageprotocolsto reducethe sizeof the current or with recordingsin cellsthat
had exceptionallysmallZ,, amplitude(as in Fig. 9A), reasonably
good clampwasobtained asjudged by the lack of notchesin the

inwardcurrent trace. An examplefrom eachof thesetwo situations
is shownin Figure 9. Simulationsof voltage-clampin intact cells
showedthat it wasvirtually impossibleto clampthe voltage in the
dendritesfrom a somaticelectrode(Fig. 10).The voltage difference
betweensomaand distal dendritescould be as high as -80 mV
during transients(60 mV wasobtainedusingconstantfield equations).This poor voltagecontrol of the dendriteswasattributableto
the presenceof high densitiesof dendriticZ,,.
Third, the kineticsof I, wasgenerallyslowerin intact RE cells
comparedwith acutely dissociatedcells(Fig. 9). In Figure 9A, the
time courseof inactivation wasslowerin the intact cell; in Figure
9B, even though the temperature in the dissociatedcell experiment was much cooler than the intact cell experiment (23 vs
34”C), the kinetics wassimilar. The current in the intact neuron

176

J. Neurosci.,

January

Uniform

1, 1996,

76(1):169-16.5

density

Destexhe

et al. . Dendritically

Generated

Bursts

in Thalamic

RE Neurons

High distal density of T-current

of T-current

Voltage-clamp

%
--I zi

100 ms

100 ms

Current-clamp
-65 mV

““x

/------A$

D”\

/‘-

100 ms
Figure 7. Simulations of voltage-clamp and current-clamp protocols in intact RE cells. The detailed morphology of the RE cell was used with different
densities of I,. S, DI, 02, and 03 indicate dendritic locations of recording sites depicted below. Left, With a uniform density of 0.045 mS/cm*, no
low-threshold burst can be elicited from current injection in the soma (0.3 nA during 200 msec). Righr, With a higher density of 0.6 mS/cm* in distal
dendrites (shown in black), bursting behavior can be generated in current-clamp. The slow rise of the burst and the accelerando-decelerando pattern of
spikes were most prominent with dendritic I,. In both cases shown here, the voltage-clamp behavior was consistent with the current amplitudes in Figure
6 if the dendrites were removed.

would be much slowerat the lower temperature usedin dissociated cell experiments.In the model, this property aroseonly in
intact cellswith a high densityof dendritic I,. As a consequence

of the poor voltage-clamp of the dendrites, dendritic current
transientsoccurred and addeda slowercomponentto the current
decay seenin the soma(Fig. 10). However, the spaceclampwas

Destexhe

et al.

l

Dendritically

D3

Generated

Bursts

in Thalamic

RE Neurons

J. Neurosci.,

January

1, 1996,

76(1):169-185

177

I
20 ms

Spatial distribution

-60

C

Dendritic

-40

of membrane

-20

membrane

0

20

potential

(mV)

potential

profile

D3 . . . .. . .. . .. . + S

FL~LW~ 8. Distribution
of the membrane
potential
during dendritlcally
generated
bursts. A, Expansion
of
during a burst (same simulation
as in Fig. 7, bottomr-q@). B, Snapshots of electrical
activity in the cell. The
by colors, as shown in the color scale. The \IX successive frames correspond
to the six circles indicated in
a path from distal dendrite to the soma (from D3 to S in Fig. 7). The abscissa shows the dktance from ?oma
potential
along this path (in mV).

almost perfect in the dissociated cell model (data not shown),
suggesting that in this preparation the estimates of the kinetics of
the T-current were reliable (see Huguenard
and Prince, 1992).

the somatic and dendritic
membrane
potentlal
distribution
of membrane
potential is mdlcated
A. C, Profile of the membrane
potentlal
along
(In pm), and the ordinate shows the membrane

Fourth, presumed
dendritic
impalements
of RE cells in
viva show a burst structure dominated
by a broad spike with
smaller-amplitude
spikes (Fig. 11). The broad spike presum-

178

J. Neurosci.,

January

1, 1996,

Intact cell

76(1):169-18.5

Destexhe

Acutely dissociated

cell

A

B

%
J
1/“x
60 ms

Figure 9. Comparison of voltage-clamp recordings of I,, in intact and
acutely dissociated RE cells in vitro. A, Activation protocols for I,, in an
intact cell (Jeft) compared with an acutely dissociated cell (right). The
command potentials were -60, -50, -40, and -30 mV (left) and -50,
-40, -30, and -20 mV (right); both were at 23°C (details of the protocols
are given in Huguenard and Prince, 1992). The cell at the left had an
exceptionally low amplitude of I,,; however, it was still higher than that of
dissociated cells (see also Fig. 6A); the time course of inactivation was
slower in the intact cell. B; Voltage-clamp steps in an intact and a
dissociated cell. In the intact cell (left), the holding potential was -71 mV
and the command potential was -46 mV (34°C): h the dissociated cell,
they were -110 and -40 mV, respectively (23°C). The amplitude was
higher and the time course was slower in the intact cell. B was modified
from Figure 1 of Huguenard and Prince (1994).

ably was a calcium spike, whereas the small-amplitude spikes
were presumedto be sodium spikes,becausethey showedthe
typical accelerando-decelerandostructure of RE cells. Sodium
spikeswith increasingfrequency were correlated with the rising
phase of the calcium spike, whereas spikes with decreasing
frequencies were associatedwith the decaying phase of the
calcium spike. A strikingly similar behavior wasobservedin the
dendritic membranepotential of the model (Fig. 7, right, D2).
These observations,together with the stability of the recording
and with the negative value of the resting potential, suggest
that the impalement was dendritic. These patterns of bursting
in the dendrites were generated only when the distal dendritic
density of I, was high.
Finally, another consequenceof the possibledendritic localization of I, is that other currents dependingon the entry of Ca2+
through T-channelsmight alsobe localized in the dendrites.For
example, a calcium-dependentpotassium current, ZKlcal, was
shownto underlie repetitive burstingin RE cells(Avanzini et al.,
1989;Bal and McCormick, 1993).
Our model did not generate rhythmic bursting from steady
inputs becausethis current wasnot included. The characteristics
of ZKlcalpresenta complex problem. This current activates relatively slowly, as indicated

by the broadness

of the burst in RE

cells,but it alsomustdeactivate relatively quickly to allow repetitive bursting to occur at frequenciesof -10 Hz (Avanzini et al.,
1989;Bal and McCormick, 1993). More data are neededbefore
we can design precise models to investigate a somatic versus
dendritic localization for I,[,-,,.

et al.

l

Dendritically

Generated

Bursts

in Thalamic

RE Neurons

.,Properties of RE bursts in viva
Perhapsthe major consequenceof the dendritic T-current is that
dendritic synaptic currents potentially can exert a powerful control of the bursting properties of RE cells. With dendritic Tcurrent, we have shown above that the model reproduced the
burst properties seen in slices,but it did not account for the
graded propertiesof the bursts seenin viva (seeFig. 4). In this
section, we test the possibility that the presenceof additional
depolarizingcurrentsin the dendritescould lead to gradedbursting behavior.
A seriesof previouscomputationalstudieshave consideredthe
effects of synaptic bombardmenton the passiveand integrative
propertiesin other types of neurons(Holmes and Woody, 1989;
Bernander et al., 1991;Rapp et al., 1992). These studiesfound
significantdecreases
in the input resistanceand the time constant,
aswell asa reducedeffectivenessof a singlepostsynapticpotential
to dischargethe cell, but did not investigatethe effect on intrinsic
properties.A modelingstudy of Purkinje cellssimulatedthe effect
of dendritic synaptic currents on the firing patterns of the cell,
which were closeto in vivo recordingsin the presenceof synaptic
bombardment(De Schutter and Bower, 1994).We estimatehere
the impact of synapticcurrents on the propertiesof the burstsin
RE cells by adding sustaineddepolarizing currents distributed
uniformly on the dendritic tree.
An intact RE cell with distal dendritic I, was used to study
the effect of additional dendritic currents on burst generation.
In current-clamp mode, the RE cell model normally generated
all-or-none burst responses(Fig. 12A), in agreement with recordings of RE cells in vitro (see Fig. 5) (see also Llin& and
Geijo-Barrientos, 1988). For depolarizing pulses of progressively larger amplitudes,the bursts in the model appearedfully
developed, and the pattern of spikes remained similar for
stronger current pulses.It was possibleto obtain intermediate
patterns, but only by carefully tuning the current amplitude,
becausethese patterns only occurred in a very narrow range
(data not shown).
In contrast, a gradedburst responsewasobservedin RE cellsin
vivo (Fig. 4) (seealsoFig. 5 in Contreras et al., 1993).A possible
reasonfor this discrepancyis that, in vivo, RE cellsare continuously bombardedby excitatory synaptic inputs from thalamicand
cortical origin; the depolarizing dendritic current causedby this
input might counteract the activation of the T-current in the
dendrites. Using the same model as in Figure 124, with an
additional depolarizing conductanceuniformly distributed in the
dendrites,the RE cell generatedburstsin a gradedmanner(Fig.
12B). These graded burst responseswere in agreementwith in
vivo recordings.
It wasdifficult to determine the exact amount of depolarizing
current equivalent to synapticbombardment,and a wide range of
possibledensitiesand reversalpotentialswasused.The tendency
for generatinggradedburstingbehaviordependedon the intensity
of the depolarizing current; a typical model with a moderate
intensity

is shown in Figure 12Z3. For higher intensities,

it became

increasinglydifficult to generatea burst, which suggests
that tonic
bombardmentof the dendritic tree could have a decisivecontrol
on burst generation, through depolarization and inactivation
of I,.
We also tested the possibility of generating graded bursting
behavior from a purely somatic current (0 mV reversal) representing,for example,the leak causedby electrodeimpalement.In
this case,we could not obtain a graded burst response.In the

Destexhe

et al. 9 Dendritically

Generated

Bursts in Thalamic

J. Neurosci.,

RE Neurons

A
-110 mV

1 second

January

1, 1996, 16(1):169-l&35

179

B

I(

Dendritic membrane potential profile

-30 mV

r

60

-;L+&q
t=1030

Membrane potential (mV)
60

-60

Distal dendrite (D3)

60 -

0

-350

t=1200

-260

I

i

-210

I

-140

I

-70

I

Soma (S)
-60

-120

-60 -

-..-I

60
-350

900

1000

1100

1200

1300

1400

-2:

-2;o

-1140 -:”

r

zi

t=1400

Time (ms)

-60

L

Figure IO.
Poor access to the dendrites of RE cells in voltage-clamp mode. A, Voltage-clamp protocol similar to Figure 7 with a high density of distal
T-current. In addition to the current recorded at the electrode, the somatic and distal dendritic membrane potentials are shown (S and D3 are as described
in Fig. 7). The deviation from voltage-clamp in the dendrites is pronounced. Similar results were obtained using constant field equations for I,. B,
Dendritic membrane potential profile (defined identically as in Fig. 8) taken during the voltage-clamp protocol in A (same units of time as in A). From
an initially good space clamp at -110 mV, the attempt to clamp the cell at -30 mV was unsuccessful because of powerful current transients in the
dendrites, which could not be controlled from the soma. Because of these transients, the kinetics of the current recorded in the soma appears to be slower
than in dissociated cells.

model, bursting is generatedin the dendritesand the only way to
alter its properties is to change the balance of currents in the
dendrites.
Reduced models
Models that incorporate morphological details of the dendritic
tree are certainly relevant to study single-cellbehavior. However,
simulatinglarge-scalenetworks requiresusing simplifiedmodels

that are more efficient to simulate.Another application of reduced modelsis hybrid recordings, in which a simulated cell is
connected artificially to a recording from a real cell (Yarom,
1991; LeMasson

et al., 1992; Renaud-LeMasson

et al., 1993).

This hybrid method requires models that can be simulated
in real time, while still conserving a sufficient degreeof realism.
In this section, we examine one- and three-compartment

180 J. Neurosci..

January

1, 1996, 76(1):169-185

Destexhe

\J
“-:+go4*
>
F
-LA

E

*_-

-80

mV

::

IO ms

B

i\

I

10 ms

C

i

5 ms

II. Presumed in viva dendritic recording of an RE cell from the
rostrolateral sector in a urethane-anesthetized
cat. A, Depolarizing
current pulses of constant intensity applied at a hyperpolarized membrane potential elicited an active response that was crowned by small
spike potentials (presumably electrotonically
attenuated somatic
spikes) with a stereotyped bursting pattern in which the first interval is
slightly longer with the frequency increasing then decreasing during the
response. Four different responses, displaced vertically for clarity,
indicate the stereotyped burst response. B, In response to depolarizing
pulses of increasing amplitudes, a passive response was obtained first,
then an active response of small amplitude and, finally, a fully developed burst. Increasing the amount of current injected (as in A) only
decreased the latency to the burst but did not change its stereotyped
shape. C, Increasing the duration of a constant amplitude depolarizing
current pulse also elicited a burst. The shorter pulse occasionally
elicited active responses that did not develop into a burst. The armw
indicate the end of the current pulses. All of the pulses in the figure
were applied at the same membrane potential (indicated in A).

et al. . Dendritically

Generated

Bursts in Thalamic

RE Neurons

be the sameasdescribedabove,and the minimal mode1wasfitted
to the voltage-clamprecordingsusinga simplexalgorithm. Using
the dendritic correction, C, in Eq. 3, as the only parameter,we
obtainedan excellentfit of the voltage-clamprecording (Fig. 2B).
The kinetics and localization of I, were investigated in the
reduced model. Voltage-clamp traces obtained with a uniform
density of I, of 0.045mS/cm’ were similar to those in the intact
cell modelwith the samedensity. As in the more detailed model,
the current-clampbehavior did not showburstingactivity (Fig. 13,
left) and the uniform density of I, had to be increasedby about
an order of magnitudeto observebursts(data not shown).
With a higher distal density of I,,, the minimal mode1showed
bursting behavior that was remarkably similar to that in the
detailedmorphologicalmodel (compareFigs.7 and 13). However,
the threshold for bursting behavior was slightly different than in
the detailed model. The properties of the bursts generated by
distal I, were the sameas describedabove for the intact cell:
namely, they had a slow rise and decay, they needed strong
current pulsesto be evoked, and they possessed
the typical accelerando-decelerandopattern of sodiumspikes(Fig. 13, right).
Graded burst responsescould be simulatedusingthe three-compartment model aswell, usingsimilardensitiesof currents asthe
detailed model (data not shown).
Finally, we investigatedbursting behavior using a single-compartment model of the RE cell. The size of the compartmentwas
determined by fitting the passiveproperties to voltage-clamp
recordings of an RE cell (Fig. 14A). The single-compartment
model could not capture all of the details of the capacitive
transientsbut neverthelessprovided an acceptablefit. Using a
density of I, closeto thresholdfor bursting behavior, the singlecompartmentmodel generatedburstsin responseto injection of
current pulses(Fig. 14B). The burst still had a relatively broad
structure, although narrower than in the presenceof dendrites.
However, it was not possibleto obtain the typical accelerandodecelerandostructure of sodium spikes. Nonetheless,the first
spikeinterval of the burst shownin Figure 14Bwaslarger than for
the subsequentones.
More importantly, depolarizing currents were ineffective in
obtaining

the graded

burst response

found

in models

having

dendritic I,.

Figure

models derived from the detailed morphological
model of the
RE cell.
We applied a procedure for simplifying the dendritic morphology, as described in Materials and Methods, to obtain a model

with three compartments.The passivepropertieswere assumed
to

DISCUSSION
We have explored computationalmodelsin concert with intracellular recordingsperformed in vivo and in vitro, and we conclude
that calciumcurrents in dendritesare essentialfor generatingthe
burstingresponses
of RE cells.We discusshere the validity of this
conclusionaswell asthe broader significanceof the modelfor the
function of the thalamic reticular nucleus.
Evidence for dendritic calcium currents
Originally suggested
by Mulle et al. (1984),the hypothesisthat I,
is localized in the dendrites is now favored by several lines of
experimentalevidence.The primary contribution of the mode1is
to show that these experimental data, sometimes contradictory,
are reconciled if we assumethat the major proportion of I, is
located in the distal portions of the dendrites.
rationale for this explanation.

We review here the

(1) The amplitudeof I, is muchlarger in intact than in acutely
dissociated

RE cells, suggesting dendritic

localization.

In dissoci-

ated cells, only the proximal parts of the dendrites are present,
and the lower amplitude is attributable to the removal of the

Destexhe

et al.

l

Dendritically

Generated

Bursts in Thalamic

RE Neurons

J. Neurosci.,

A

B

All-or-none bursts
(Soma)

Graded bursts
(Soma)

-I

January

1, 1996, 76(1):169-185

181

i ‘\

40 mV

100 ms

L

0.21 nA

\

-L

-85 mV

All-or-none bursts
(Distal dendrites)

Graded bursts
(Distal dendrites)

A
major pool of T-channelsby the dissociationprocedure.Alternatively, the T-channelssomehowmight be altered by the dissociation procedure,in which casethe difference in amplitudewould be
artifactual. The higher amplitude of T-current in dissociatedTC
cellscomparedwith dissociatedRE cells(Huguenardand Prince,
1992) arguesagainstthis possibility. This difference also implies
that there is lessT-current in the dendritesof TC cellscompared
with RE cells.
(2) The thresholdfor burst generationis higher in RE cellsthan
in TC cells,suggestingthat the burst in RE cellsis generatedaway
from the soma. Although I, activation is shifted to positive
potentials comparedwith relay cells, this difference in voltage
dependenceis not sufficient to explain the larger difference in
burst threshold.The appropriate high threshold wasobtained in
the presentmodel only if I, were located in distal dendritesand
if the cell had a relatively high axial resistance,consistentwith

Figure 12. Graded and all-or-none properties of RE bursts.
Bursting behavior was elicited by depolarizing current pulses
from -85 mV in the simulated intact RE cell. The time
courses of the membrane potential in the soma (rap) and in
the distal dendrites (superimposed, bosom) are indicated. A,
All-or-none bursts in the intact RE cell with high density of
I,, in distal dendrites and no additional dendritic current
(same parameters as in Fig. 7, righr). The membrane potential in the distal dendrite (bottom) shows that there is a
threshold for bursting behavior. B, Graded bursts in the
presence of a sustained depolarizing current uniformly distributed in the dendrites (same simulation as in A, but with
an additional conductance of 0.02 mS/cm’ density and -20
mV reversal potential). In this case, the number of action
potentials in the burst was proportional to the amplitude of
the current pulse.

resultsfrom fitting the detailed morphologicalmodel to the recordingsof the samecell. During current injection in the model,
there was a voltage difference betweenthe somaand distal dendrites of -9 mV at steady state (Fig. 7) becauseof electrotonic
attenuation. The immediateconsequenceis that more hyperpolarizing current is neededto reach the level of deinactivationof I,,
in the dendrites.BecausesomeRE neuronsare larger than the
cell studiedhere (seeJones,1985),this effect would be even more
prominent in adult animals.
(3) The accelerando-decelerando pattern of fast spikes
within the burst is consistentwith dendritic I,. We could not
replicate this characteristic pattern in the absenceof dendrites
(Fig. 14). On the other hand, accelerando-decelerando patterns were present in the intact cell with purely somaticcurrent
but, in this case,the peak amplitude of ITSwas -2.5 nA, which
is inconsistent with voltage-clamp recordings in dissociated

162

J. Neurosci.,

January

Uniform

1, 1996,

76(1):169-185

Destexhe

density of T-current

et al. . Dendritically

Generated

Bursts

in Thalamic

RE Neurons

High distal density of T-current

D2

Dl
100 urn

Voltage-clamp

100 ms

Current-clamp
-65 mV
“7

D2

z
-.-A
g
100 ms

Figure 13. Voltage-clamp and current-clamp protocols in a reduced model of an RE cell. Starting from the morphology of the cell shown in Figure lA,
the simplification procedure led to three compartments: the soma (S), proximal @I), and distal (02) dendritic compartments (corresponding
approximately to S, Dl, and D2 in Fig. 7). Right, Uniform density of I, of 0.045 mS/cm*. In current-clamp, no low-threshold burst could be elicited from
current injection in the soma (0.3 nA during 200 msec). Right, Higher density of I,, in distal dendrites (0.68 mS/cm’). In this case, similar bursts with a
slow rise and an accelerando-decelerando pattern of spikes are seen, as in Figure 7. The simulation of this model was -25 times faster than the detailed
morphological model. In both cases shown here, the voltage-clamp behavior was consistent with Figure 6 in the absence of distal dendrites.

cells. The accelerando-decelerando
patterns were more robust
in models that included distal I,; we propose that this property
arises in the RE cell from the slowly increasing current load
provided by a Cazt spike occurring in distal dendrites. The
long duration and the slow rise of the burst in RE cells can be
explained by the same mechanism, in addition to the slower
kinetics of I, (Huguenard
and Prince, 1992).

(4) The voltage trace in the dendrites of the model during the
burst was consistent with the presumed dendritic recordings in RE
cells (Fig. 11). These recordings show a broad spike with lowamplitude sodium spikes, which is atypical for RE cells. It is
possible that the cell was damaged, but the stability of the recording and of the response, as well as the low resting membrane
potential, suggest that this was not the case. The striking resem-

Destexhe

et al.

l

Dendritically

Generated

Bursts in Thalamic

J. Neurosci.,

RE Neurons

January

1, 1996, 16(1):169-185

163

of dendritic currents in the bursting properties of other types of
cells(e.g., Traub and Miles, 1991).The comparisonof intracellular recordingswith and without dendrites,tracing of the stained
cells, and simulating the dendritic morphology are promising
proceduresfor investigatingtheseproblems.

B
40mV

1

looms
-7OmV
-\

14. Single-compartment model of the RE cell. A, Simplex fitting
of a single-compartment model to estimate the optimal size for the cell.
The fit gave an equivalent cylinder of 1= 64.52 * 0.01 Km with a diameter
of 70 pm. Other parameters were identical to Figure 24; the least-square
error, however, was larger in this case (-3%). B, Low-threshold burst
obtained in this model after current injection (0.3 nA during 200 msec;
density of I, = 3 mS/cm*). In this case, there is no accelerandodecelerando pattern of spikes, and the cell could not produce graded
bursting behavior.
Figure

blancewith the dendritic potential in the model is consistentwith
a dendritic impalement.
(5) The kinetics of ITSwas slower in intact RE cells than in
acutely dissociatedcells.This wasreproducedin the model when
the T-current waslocated in distal dendrites.The model revealed
the difficulty of voltage-clampingdendrites with active currents.
Additional current transients of dendritic origin were evoked
during voltage-clampin the somaand could be interpreted incorrectly as a slowerkinetics of the current.
(6) In the model, the RE cell could generate graded bursting
behavior only if it had dendritic I,. As discussedin more detail
below, this istypical of RE cellsin viva (Contreraset al., 1993)and
is entirely consistentwith a competition between extrinsic and
intrinsic currentsoccurring in the dendrites.It might be that other
currents alsocontribute to this response.
(7) Although RE neurons have been classifiedin different
morphologicalclasses(Spreaficoet al., 1991),no clear differences
in electrophysiologicalproperties have been correlated with this
morphologicaldiversity (but seeContreraset al., 1992).We found
remarkablysimilarburstingpropertiesfrom different modelsprovided that there wasa high density of I, in the dendrites.All of
the above properties could be reproducedwith a model with as
few as three compartments.Taken together, these data suggest
that morphology haslittle influenceon electrophysiologicalproperties recordedin the soma.The morphologicalcharacteristicsof
RE neurons might be related, rather, to the organization of
synapticinputs.
A similarapproachmay be taken with other types of neuronsin
which dendritic conductancesmight determinetheir electrophysiological behavior. Abundant evidence existsfor the involvement

impact of dendritic calcium currents on the
electrophysiological properties
The dendritic localization of I, potentially can have several
important consequences
for the behavior of RE cells.
First, GABAergic collateralsbetween RE neuronshave been
identified (Jones,1985;Bal et al., 1995; Liu et al., 1995).Intracellular recordings reveal GABAergic IPSPs in RE cells
(Destexheet al., 1994a;Bal et al., 1995),but they are of relatively
low amplitude. However, if the T-current is dendritic, IPSPs
arisingfrom neighboringRE cellsmight initiate reboundburstsin
localized dendritic regions,without necessarilyany evidence of
IPSP in somaticrecordings.Moreover, as suggestedby a recent
model (Destexhe et al., 1994b), the depolarization of RE cells
provided by neuromodulatoryinputs promotestheir sensitivity to
IPSPsbecauseZ,, tendsto be more deinactivated.The possibility
of rebound burstsin GABAergically connectedRE cellscould be
testedby stimulatingRE cellsafter blockadeof excitatory synaptic
transmissionand looking for rebound bursts.
Second,in a network of interconnected RE cells, dendritic I,
opensnew possibilitiesfor generatingoscillatorybehavior. In cats,
the RE nucleus is characterized
by the presenceof dendrodendritic GABAergic synapses
(Descheneset al., 1985;Yen et al.,
1985). GABAergically connected cells with a rebound burst responsereadily oscillate(Perkel and Mulloney, 1974;Destexheand
Babloyantz, 1992; Wang and Rinzel, 1992; Destexhe et al.,
1994a,b;Golomb et al., 1994).As proposedpreviously(Deschenes
et al., 1985; Mulle et al., 1986) it is possiblethat, through
dendro-dendritic synapses,GABAergically connected RE cells
could generate synchronized oscillations,as in the case of the
deafferented RE nucleus in vivo (Steriade et al., 1987). The
possibility of having many local oscillators in GABAergically
connecteddendritesof RE cellsopensa rangeof possibilitiesfor
more complex oscillatory behavior (Destexhe et al., 1994a).
Third, if dendritic branchescontaining a high density of I, are
hyperpolarized, the deinactivated T-current could provide high
sensitivityto incomingEPSPsand could efficiently generateburst
discharges.
This possibilitywassuggestedearlier (Contreraset al.,
1993) and is now supportedby recent experimentsshowingthat
strong corticothalamic excitatory volleys can trigger dendritically
generated bursts in RE cells and promote spindle oscillations
(Contrerasand Steriade, 1995;Contrerasand Steriade,in press).
Taken together, the aboveobservationssuggestthat a range of
complex interactions can take place in the dendritesof RE cells.
Mutual inhibition betweenRE cells can have different effectson
triggering, shunting, or shortening burst discharges,in a manner that dependscritically on the membranepotential (seealso
Destexheet al., 1994b).
Finally, the dendritic origin of burst dischargessuggestsa new
mechanismby which RE cellscould participate in the control of
the transition of the thalamocorticalsystembetweenwakefulness
and sleep. In the present model, the presence of additional
depolarizing currents in the dendrites counteracted the genesis of the burst. This behavior could not be observed in a
single-compartmentmodel, suggestingthat the somawith sodium
spikesand the dendriteswith calcium spikesconstitute a device
that functions accordingto the synapticinput received.The den-

184

J. Neurosci.,

January

1, 1996,

76(1):169-185

Destexhe

drites of RE cells would then “sample” the amount of synaptic
activity between the thalamus and the cortex and tune the responsiveness of the RE nucleus according to these inputs. For sustained input, which occurs during tonic activity in the thalamus
and cortex, the RE cell does not have the tendency to fire bursts.
For more phasic inputs, as during synchronized sleep, the dendrites no longer would be bombarded in a sustained manner, and
bursting behavior would be promoted.
We propose that this type of interplay of currents in the dendrites acts in concert with neuromodulation
in switching the
thalamus between tonic and bursting modes.

REFERENCES
Avanzini G, de Curtis M, Panzica F, Spreafico R (1989) Intrinsic properties of nucleus reticularis thalami neurones of the rat studied in vitro.
J Physiol (Land) 416:111-22.
Bal T, McCormick DA (1993) Mechanisms of oscillatory activity in guinea-pig nucleus reticularis thalami in vitro: a mammalian pacemaker. J
Physiol (Lond) 468:669-691.
Bal T, von Krosigk M, McCormick DA (1995) Role of the ferret perigeniculate nucleus in the generation of synchronized oscillations in
vitro. J Physiol (Land) 483:665-685.
Barrett JN, Crill WE (1974) Influence of dendritic location and membrane properties on the effectiveness of synapses on cat motoneurones.
J Physiol (Lond) 239:325-345.
Bernander 0, Douglas RJ, Martin KA, Koch C (1991) Synaptic background activity influences spatiotemporal integration in single pyramidal cells. Proc Nat1 Acad Sci USA 88:11569-11573.
Bush PC, Sejnowski TJ (1993) Reduced compartmental models of neocortical pyramidal cells. J Neurosci Methods 46:159-166.
Cauller LJ, Connors BW (1992) Functions of very distal dendrites: experimental and computational studies of Layer I synapses on neocortical pyramidal cells. In: Single neuron computation (McKenna T, Davis
J, idrnetzer SF, eds). Bosion: Academic.*
.
Contreras D. Curro Dossi R. Steriade M (1992) Burstine and tonic
discharges in two classes of reticular thalam’ic ne;rons. J Geurophysiol
68:973-977.
Contreras D, Curro Dossi R, Steriade M (1993) Electrophysiological
properties of cat reticular thalamic neurones in vivo. J Physiol (Lond)
470:273-294.
Contreras D, Steriade M (1995) Cellular basis of EEG slow rhythms: a
study of dynamic corticothalamic relationships. J Neurosci 15:604-622.
Contreras D, Steriade M (1996) Spindle oscillation in cats: the role of
corticothalamic feedback in a thalamically-generated rhythm. J Physiol
(Lond), in press.
Desch&nes M, Madariaga-Domich A, Steriade M (1985) Dendrodendritic synapses in the cat reticularis thalami nucleus: a structural basis
for thalamic spindle synchronization. Brain Res 334:165-168.
De Schutter E, Bower JM (1994) An active membrane model of the
cerebellar Purkinje cell. II. Simulation of synaptic responses. J Neurophysiol 713401-419.
Destexhe A, Babloyantz A (1992) Cortical coherent activity induced by
thalamic oscillations. In: Neural network dynamics (Taylor JG,
Caianello ER, Cotterill RMJ, Clark JW, eds); pp 234-244. Berlin:
Springer.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (1994a) A model of
spindle rhythmicity in the isolated thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurophysiol 72:803-818.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M (199413) Modeling
the control of reticular thalamic oscillations by neuromodulators. NeuroReport 5:2217-2220.
Destexhe A, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ (1993) A model for 8-10 Hz
spindling in interconnected thalamic relay and reticularis neurons. Biophys J 65~2474-2478.
Domich L, Oakson G, Steriade M (1986) Thalamic burst patterns in the
naturally sleeping cat: a comparison between cortically projecting and
reticulaiis neirones. J Physioi (Lond) 379:429-449. . _ ”
Golomb D, Wang XJ. Rinzel J (19941 Svnchronization oronerties of
spindle oscillations in a thalamic ret&ar
nucleus model. J Neurophysiol 72:1109-1126.
Hille B (1992) Ionic channels of excitable membranes. Sunderland, MA:
Sinauer.
I_

.

L

1

et al. . Dendritically

Generated

Bursts

in Thalamic

RE Neurons

Hines M (1989) A program for simulation of nerve equations with
branching geometries. Int J Biomed Comput 24:.55-68.
Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF (1952) A quantitative description of membrane
current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J
Physiol (Lond) 117:500-544.
Holmes WR, Woody CD (1989) Effects of uniform and non-uniform
synaptic “activation-distributions”
on the cable properties of modeled
cortical pyramidal neurons. Brain Res 505:12-22.
Huguenard JR, Hamill OP, Prince DA (1989) Sodium channels in dendrites of rat cortical pyramidal neurons. Proc Nat1 Acad Sci USA
86~2473-2477.
Huguenard JR, Prince DA (1992) A novel T-type current underlies prolonged Ca ‘+-dependent bursts firing in GABAergic neurons of rat
thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurosci 12:3804-3817.
Huguenard JR, Prince DA (1994) Intrathalamic rhythmicity studied in
vitro: nominal T-current modulation causes robust anti-oscillatory effects. J Neurosci 14:5485-5502.
Jahnsen H, Llin& RR (1984) Electrophysiological properties of guineapig thalamic neurons: an in vitro study. J Physiol (Lond) 349:205-226.
Jones EG (1985) The thalamus. New York: Plenum.
LeMasson G, Renaud-LeMasson S, Sharp A, Abbott LF, Marder E
(1992) Real time interaction between a model neuron and the crustacean somatogastric nervous system. Sot Neurosci Abstr 18:1055.
Liu XB, Warren RA, Jones EG (1995) Synaptic distribution of afferents
from reticular nucleus in ventroposterior nucleus of the cat thalamus. J
Comp Neural 352:187-202.
Llinas RR, Geijo-Barrientos E (1988) In vitro studies of mammalian
thalamic and reticularis thalami neurons. In: Cellular thalamic mechanisms (Bentivoglio M, Spreafico R, eds), pp 23-33. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Mainen ZF, Joerges J, Huguenard JR, Sejnowski TJ (1995) A model of
spike initiation in neocortical pyramidal neurons. Neuron, in press.
Major G, Larkman AU, Jonas P, Sakmann B, Jack JJB (1994) Detailed
passive cable models of whole-cell recorded CA3 pyramidal neurons in
rat hippocampal slices. J Neurosci 14:4613-4638.
McCormick DA, Huguenard JR (1992) A model of the electrophysiological properties of thalamocortical relay neurons. J Neurophysiol
68:1384-1400.
Mulle C, Madariaga A, Desch&nes M (1986) Morphology and electrophysiological properties of reticularis thalami neurons in cat: in viva
study of a thalamic pacemaker. J Neurosci 6:2134-2145.
Perkel DH, Mulloney B (1974) Motor pattern production in reciprocally
inhibitory neurons exhibiting postinhibitory
rebound. Science
185:181-183.
Press WH, Flannery BP, Teukolsky SA, Vetterling WT (1986) Numerical
recipes. The art of scientific computing. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Rail W (1995) The theoretical foundation of dendritic function (Segev I,
Rinzel J, Shepherd GM, eds). Cambridge: MIT.
Rail W, Burke RE, Holmes WR, Jack JJ, Redman SJ, Segev I (1992)
Matching dendritic neuron models to experimental data. Physiol Rev
72:s159-S186.
Ramon y Cajal S (1909) Histologie du systeme nerveux de I’homme et
des vertebres (translated by Azoulay L). Paris: Maloine.
Rapp M, Segev I, Yarom Y (1994) Physiology, morphology and detailed
passive models of guinea-pig cerebellar Purkinje cells. J Physiol (Lond)
474:101-118.
Rapp M, Yarom Y, Segev I (1992) The impact of parallel fiber background activity on the cable properties of cerebellar Purkinje cells.
Neural Comput 4:518-533.
Renaud-LeMasson S, LeMasson G, Marder E, Abbott LF (1993) Hybrid
circuits of interacting computer model and biological neurons. In:
Advanced in neural information processing systems, Vol 5 (Hanson SJ,
Cowan JD, Giles GL, eds), pp 813-819, San Mateo, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann.
Rhodes PA, Gray CM (1994) Simulations of intrinsically bursting neocortical pyramidal neurons. Neural Comput 6:1086-1110.
Sejnowski TJ, Destexhe A, Contreras D, Steriade M, Huguenard JR
(1995) In vivo, in vitro and computational analysis of dendritic currents
in thalamic reticular neurons. Sot Neurosci Abstr 21:1187.
Spreafico R, Battaglia G, Frassoni C (1991) The reticular thalamic nucleus (RTN) of the rat: cytoarchitectural, Golgi, immunocytochemical,
and horseradish peroxidase study. J Comp Neurol 304:478-490.
Steriade M, Domich L, Oakson G (1986) Reticularis thalami neurons
revisited: activity changes during shifts in states of vigilance. J Neurosci
6:68-81.

Destexhe

et al.

l

Dendritically

Generated

Bursts in Thalamic

RE Neurons

Steriade M, Domich L, Oakson G, Deschenes M (1987) The deafferented reticular thalamic nucleus generates spindle rhythmicitv. J Neurophysiol 57:260-273.
Steriade M, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ (1993) Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused brain. Science 262:679-685.
Stratford K, Mason A, Larkman AU, Major G, Jack J (1989) The modeling of pyramidal neurones in the visual cortex. Ini The computing
neuron (Durbin A, Miall C, Mitchison G, eds), pp 296-321. Workingham, UK: Addison-Wesley.
Stuart GJ, Sakmann B (1994) Active propagation of somatic action potentials into neocortical pyramidal cell dendrites. Nature 367:69-72.
Traub RD (1979) Neocortical pyramidal cells: a model with dendritic
calcium conductance reproduces repetitive firing and epileptic behavior.
Brain Res 173:243-257.
Traub RD, Miles R (1991) Neuronal networks of the hippocampus.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Traub RD, Wong RK, Miles R, Michelson H (1991) A model of a CA3
hippocampal pyramidal neuron incorporating voltage-clamp data on
intrinsic conductances. J Neurophysiol 66:635-650.

J. Neurosci.,

January

1, 1996, 76(1):169-165

185

von Krosigk M, Bal T, McCormick DA (1993) Cellular mechanisms of a
synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science 261:361-364.
Wallenstein GV (1994) A model of the electrophysiological properties of
nucleus reticularis thalami neurons. Biophys J 66:978-988.
Wang XJ, Rinzel J (1992) Alternating and synchronous rhythms in reciprocally inhibitory model neurons. Neural Comput 4:84-97.
Wang XJ, Rinzel J (1993) Spindle rhythmicity in the reticularis thalami
nucleus: synchronization among inhibitory neurons. Neuroscience
53:899-904.
Warren RA, Agmon A, Jones EG (1994) Oscillatory synaptic interactions between ventroposterior and reticular neurons in mouse thalamus
in vitro. J Neurophysiol 721993-2003.
Yarom Y (1991) Rhythmogenesis in a hybrid system: interconnecting an
olivary neuron to an analog network of coupled oscillators. Neuroscience 44~263-275.
Yen CT, Conley M, Hendry SH, Jones EG (1985) The morphology of
physiologically identified GABAergic neurons in the somatic sensory part
of the thalamic reticular nucleus in the cat. J Neurosci 5:2254-2268.

