The Journal of Neuroscience, February 15, 2000, 20(4):1307–1317

Action Potential Backpropagation and Somato-dendritic
Distribution of Ion Channels in Thalamocortical Neurons
Stephen R. Williams and Greg J. Stuart
Division of Neuroscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National University, Canberra,
A.C.T. 0200, Australia

Thalamocortical (TC) neurons of the dorsal thalamus integrate
sensory inputs in an attentionally relevant manner during wakefulness and exhibit complex network-driven and intrinsic oscillatory activity during sleep. Despite these complex intrinsic and
network functions, little is known about the dendritic distribution of ion channels in TC neurons or the role such channel
distributions may play in synaptic integration. Here we demonstrate with simultaneous somatic and dendritic recordings from
TC neurons in brain slices that action potentials evoked by
sensory or cortical excitatory postsynaptic potentials are initiated near the soma and backpropagate into the dendrites of TC
neurons. Cell-attached recordings demonstrated that TC neuron dendrites contain a nonuniform distribution of sodium but a
roughly uniform density of potassium channels across the so-

matodendritic area examined that corresponds to approximately half the average path length of TC neuron dendrites.
Dendritic action potential backpropagation was found to be
active, but compromised by dendritic branching, such that
action potentials may fail to invade relatively distal dendrites.
We have also observed that calcium channels are nonuniformly
distributed in the dendrites of TC neurons. Low-threshold calcium channels were found to be concentrated at proximal
dendritic locations, sites known to receive excitatory synaptic
connections from primary afferents, suggesting that they play a
key role in the amplification of sensory inputs to TC neurons.

Thalamocortical (TC) neurons of the dorsal thalamus integrate
synaptic input from the periphery, neocortex, and brainstem to
convey sensory information to the neocortex in an attentionally
relevant and state-dependent manner (Steriade and Deschenes,
1984; McCormick, 1992; Steriade et al., 1993; Guido and Weyand,
1995; Sherman and Guillery, 1996). The complex electrophysiological properties of TC neurons serve to highlight their important integrative role (McCormick, 1992). Anatomical studies have
revealed a precise organization of excitatory inputs from sensory
and cortical inputs to the stem and relatively distal dendrites of
TC neurons, respectively (Ralston and Herman, 1969; Sherman
and Guillery, 1996). A similar anatomical segregation of inhibitory inputs from intrinsic and extrinsic GABAergic neurons may
facilitate complex synaptic interactions in the dendrites of TC
neurons (Sherman and Guillery, 1996). This synaptic organization highlights the need to directly investigate dendritic function
in TC neurons.
Recent advances in recording techniques have allowed investigation of the distribution of voltage-activated channels that
influence synaptic integration in the dendrites of several types of
central neurons (Johnston et al., 1996; Stuart et al., 1997b). The
complex radial, multi-branched fine caliber dendritic arbor of TC
neurons (Grossman et al., 1973; Bloomfield et al., 1987; Havton
and Ohara, 1993; Ohara and Havton, 1994; Ohara et al., 1995;
Warren and Jones, 1997), however, has until now precluded direct

analysis. Imaging, anatomical, and modeling studies have indicated that the dendrites of TC neurons contain voltage-activated
calcium currents (Munsch et al., 1997; Zhou et al., 1997; Budde et
al., 1998; Destexhe et al., 1998); however, the distribution and
properties of these channels are unknown.
Simultaneous dendritic and somatic recording would allow
investigation of the site(s) of action potential generation in TC
neurons (Stuart et al., 1997b). Furthermore, once generated,
action potentials may backpropagate into TC dendrites, where the
complex dendritic branching of these neurons may influence
action potential invasion (Spruston et al., 1995). Recent modeling
studies have indicated that the geometry of the dendritic tree
plays a key role in controlling the extent of active backpropagation of action potentials, with complex multi-branched dendritic
arbors compromising this form of retrograde information transfer
(Hausser et al., 1998). Similarly, modeling studies of branched
cable and axonal structures have demonstrated that propagation
of action potentials may fail or be compromised at branch points
(Goldstein and Rall, 1974; Luscher and Shiner, 1990; Manor et
al., 1991). The multi-branched structure of TC neuron dendrites,
therefore, allows direct investigation of the role of dendritic
branch points in the control of action potential backpropagation.
The failure of action potential invasion into parts of a multibranched dendritic tree may have important functional outcomes.
For example, backpropagating action potentials may invade some
areas of the dendritic tree resetting synaptic integration but fail to
influence activity in others (Spruston et al., 1995; Magee and
Johnston, 1997; Stuart et al., 1997b; Stuart and Hausser, 1998).
Here we directly address these issues by making simultaneous
whole-cell and cell-attached patch-clamp recordings from the
soma and dendrites of TC neurons in slices of the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus (dLGN).

Received Sept. 17, 1999; revised Nov. 15, 1999; accepted Nov. 24, 1999.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Greg Stuart, Division of Neuroscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Mills Road, Australian National
University, Canberra, A.C.T. 0200, Australia. E-mail: Greg.Stuart@anu.edu.au.
This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust and the Human Frontiers Science
Program.
Copyright © 2000 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/00/201307-11$15.00/0

Key words: sodium channel; calcium channel; potassium
channel; burst firing; patch clamp; dendrite; thalamus

1308 J. Neurosci., February 15, 2000, 20(4):1307–1317

MATERIALS AND METHODS
E xperiments were performed according to methods approved by the
Animal E xperimentation Ethics Committee of the Australian National
University. Wistar rats (postnatal day 16 –22) were decapitated, and
300-␮m-thick brain slices of the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus were
prepared either in the plane of the optic tract (Crunelli et al., 1987b;
Williams et al., 1996) or parasagittally (T urner and Salt, 1998). At this
age, the synaptic, morphological, and electrophysiological properties of
rat TC neurons are similar to those of adult animals (Perez Velazquez
and C arlen, 1996; Warren and Jones, 1997; Warren et al., 1997; Golshani
et al., 1998).
Slices were perf used with oxygenated Ringer’s solution of the following composition (in mM): 125 NaC l, 25 NaHC O3, 3 KC l, 1.25 NaH2PO4,
2 C aC l2, 1 MgC l2, and 10 glucose. E xperiments on action potential
backpropagation were performed at 31–33°C; all other experiments were
conducted at room temperature (20 –24°C). Simultaneous somatic (pipette resistance 2–7 M⍀) and dendritic (pipette resistance 10 –15 M⍀)
patch-clamp recordings were made from visually identified TC neurons
using two identical current-clamp amplifiers (Dagan) as previously described (Stuart and Sakmann, 1994). If the formation of a dendritic
recording altered the somatic membrane potential or input resistance,
both recordings were abandoned. A patch-clamp amplifier (Axon Instruments) was used in voltage and fast current-clamp mode for experiments
involving the generation of a somatic action potential waveform in the
presence of tetrodotoxin (TTX). Synaptic potentials were evoked with
the use of a metal bipolar electrode or a patch pipette (1–2 M⍀) placed
within the optic tract, within the nucleus reticularis thalami to stimulate
fibers of the cortical backprojection, or close (within 100 ␮m) to the
recorded neuron. Synaptic responses were evoked at low frequency
(0.1– 0.5 Hz), usually in the presence of the GABAA receptor antagonist
bicuculline methiodide. Somatic and dendritic cell-attached recordings
(pipette resistance 12–15 M⍀) were made using on-line leak subtraction
(P/4), and caref ul adjustment of pipette capacitance neutralization was
made. No differences in the degree or time of negative pressure applied
to the back of pipettes was required to form high resistance (3–10 G⍀)
seals at somatic and dendritic sites, suggesting that similar membrane
areas were sampled. For whole-cell recordings, patch electrodes were
filled with the following (in mM): 135 K-gluconate, 7 NaC l, 10 H EPES,
0.5 EGTA, 2 Na2-ATP, 0.3 Na2-GTP, 10 Na2-phosphocreatine, and 2
MgC l (pH 7.2 adjusted with KOH; osmolarity 270 mOsm). No correction
was made for liquid junction potentials. For cell-attached recordings of
Na and K currents, patch electrodes contained (in mM): 135 NaC l, 3 KC l,
1 C aC l2, 2 MgC l2, 3 NiC l2, 0.5 C dC l2,10 H EPES, and 10 glucose, pH 7.2;
whereas for recordings of C a 2ϩ currents, electrodes contained 140 mM
tetraethylammonium chloride (TEA), 10 mM BaC l2, 2 mM MgC l2, 1 mM
C sC l2, 3 mM 4-aminopyridine, 1 ␮M TTX, and 10 mM H EPES (pH 7.2
adjusted with Tris-base solution) (Mouginot et al., 1997). For whole-cell
recordings, voltage and current signals were filtered at 10 or 30 kHz,
whereas for cell-attached recordings current signals were filtered at 2–5
kHz. Signals were acquired at 20 –100 kHz, using an I TC -16 interface
(Instrutech Corporation, L ong Island, N Y) controlled by an Apple
PowerPC implementing Axograph acquisition and analysis software
(kindly supplied by Dr. J. C lements, Division of Neuroscience, Australian National University). Maximal conductance was calculated with an
equation of the form g ϭ I/(VT Ϫ Vrev), where I is the recorded current,
VT is the test voltage, and Vrev is the reversal potential extrapolated from
current–voltage relationships. Steady-state activation and inactivation
curves were fit with a single Boltzmann equation of the form: y ϭ 1/(1 ϩ
e (V1/2 Ϫ V)/ k), where V1/2 is the voltage of half-maximal activation or
inactivation, and k is a constant. The rise and decay of outward currents
were fit with an equation of the form y ϭ a (1 Ϫ e (Ϫt / ␶ rise))G ⅐ (e (Ϫt /
␶ decay)
ϩ c), where t is time, ␶rise and ␶decay are the time constants of rise
and decay, b is the power of the activation process (Huguenard et al.,
1991), and a and c are scaling factors. Numerical values are given in the
text as mean Ϯ SEM, unless stated otherwise. Statistical analysis was
performed with either Student’s t test or ANOVA, with statistical significance determined with ␣ ϭ 0.05.

RESULTS
The dendritic morphology of TC neurons is well preserved in
slices of the rat dLGN (Crunelli et al., 1987b; Williams et al.,
1996). These neurons exhibit radial dendritic trees, with 3–10
stem dendrites, that branch to form second to seventh order
terminal dendrites (Williams et al., 1996). The dendritic path

Williams and Stuart • Action Potential Backpropagation in TC Neurons

length (length from origin to termination) has been found to be
on average 151 ␮m (range 58 –193 ␮m) in TC neurons of the adult
rat somatosensory thalamus (Ohara and Havton, 1994). In the
present investigation, dLGN TC neurons were visually identified
using interference contrast video microscopy (see Fig. 5B) by
their relatively large round somata and the presence of three or
more stem dendrites, which had diameters of ϳ1–3 ␮m. This
method of identification was confirmed by somatic whole-cell
recordings that revealed characteristic electrophysiological properties of TC neurons, namely a robust low-threshold calcium
potential and a highly rectified voltage–current relationship
(Williams et al., 1996).

Initiation and backpropagation of action potentials
Simultaneous whole-cell current-clamp recordings were made
from the soma and dendrites of TC neurons. Electrical stimulation of the sensory input (optic tract) (n ϭ 6) or cortical backprojection (n ϭ 8) evoked EPSPs that led to the generation of
either a single or high-frequency burst of action potentials in a
voltage-dependent manner (Fig. 1 A, C). This corresponds to the
two action potential firing modes of TC neurons (Deschenes et
al., 1982; Llinas and Jahnsen, 1982). Burst firing is known to be
driven by the activation of low-threshold calcium (IT) channels,
which form a transient depolarizing potential termed a lowthreshold calcium potential (LTCP) (Crunelli et al., 1987a; Llinas, 1988; Coulter et al., 1989; Hernandez-Cruz and Pape, 1989;
McCormick, 1992; Steriade et al., 1993). This LTCP has recently
been suggested to be generated by IT channels located in the
distal dendrites of TC neurons (Destexhe et al., 1998). Activation
of these calcium channels may therefore lead to dendritic depolarization sufficient to evoke dendritic action potential initiation,
as has been shown in other central neurons after intense distal
dendritic depolarization (Schiller et al., 1997; Stuart et al., 1997a;
Golding and Spruston, 1998).
Under all conditions, EPSPs led to the generation of single or
LTCP-driven bursts of action potentials that were always recorded first at the somatic recording electrode (n ϭ 14) (Fig.
1 A, C, insets). In an attempt to depolarize the dendrites of TC
neurons to a greater extent to search for dendritic action potential
initiation, we repetitively stimulated the sensory and cortical
inputs (Fig. 1 B, D). Repetitive stimulation of the sensory input
led to profound frequency-dependent depression of EPSPs (Fig.
1 B); the summated series of EPSPs, however, always evoked
action potentials that were recorded first somatically (n ϭ 6) (Fig.
1 B, inset). In contrast, repetitive stimulation of the cortical backprojection led to frequency-dependent facilitation, where each
EPSP of a train increased in amplitude (Fig. 1 D). This form of
input depolarized neurons to such an extent that action potentials
were inactivated and replaced by the generation of slower regenerative events (Fig. 1 D, bottom inset) (Turner and Salt, 1998).
Despite this powerful form of distal dendritic depolarization, all
action potentials and slow regenerative events were recorded first
from somatic sites (n ϭ 8) (Fig. 1 D), indicating that action
potential initiation does not occur in TC neuron dendrites.
To further explore the site of action potential initiation in TC
neurons, we evoked action potentials by the injection of current at
the soma or at the dendritic recording site (n ϭ 40) (Fig. 2 A). In
all neurons examined, action potentials were first recorded at the
soma and then backpropagated into the dendritic tree. Action
potential backpropagation was found to be decremental, with the
degree of attenuation related to the dendritic recording location.
The effects of recording location are summarized in Figure 2 A,

Williams and Stuart • Action Potential Backpropagation in TC Neurons

J. Neurosci., February 15, 2000, 20(4):1307–1317 1309

Figure 1. EPSPs evoke action potentials that backpropagate into the dendrites of TC neurons. A, Simultaneous
somatic and stem dendritic (25 ␮m from the soma/dendritic
intersection) recording of action potentials evoked by electrical stimulation of fibers of the optic tract. EPSPs led to
the generation of a single or a burst discharge of action
potentials, in a voltage-dependent manner. Membrane potential (indicated to the left of traces) was controlled by the
tonic passage of current through the somatic electrode. The
inset shows the first somatic and dendritic (thick trace)
action potential at a faster time base. Note that action
potentials are recorded first at the soma. B, Repetitive
stimulation (5 stimuli at 100 Hz) of optic tract fibers evoked
EPSPs that depress during the train. The top inset shows
superposed somatic and dendritic action potentials, and the
bottom inset the rising phase of the first EPSP of the train.
Note that the EPSP rise time is faster in the dendritic
recording made from a secondary dendrite 37 ␮m from the
soma/dendritic intersection. C, Action potential discharge
evoked by electrical stimulation of fibers of the corticothalamic tract. The dendritic recording was made from a stem
dendrite 35 ␮m from the soma/dendritic intersection. The
inset shows the first somatic and dendritic (thick trace)
action potential at a faster time base. Note that action
potentials are recorded first at the soma. D, Repetitive
stimulation of this pathway evoked EPSPs that showed
frequency-dependent facilitation. The top inset shows superposed somatic and stem dendritic (30 ␮m from the soma/
dendritic intersection) action potentials, and the bottom inset
shows slow regenerative potentials at a faster time base.

where dendritic recordings were sequentially made at the first
dichotomous branch point, from its stem dendrite, and from one
of its daughter dendrites of the same neuron. Note that the
amplitude and shape of backpropagating dendritic action potentials are dramatically altered at and after the dendritic branch
point. Pooled data derived from simultaneous somatic and dendritic recordings (n ϭ 27) demonstrated that when dendritic
recordings were made from a stem dendrite, the amplitude of
dendritic action potentials decreased, on average, by 3.8% per 10
␮m (distances from soma/dendrite intersection) (Fig. 2 B, E).
Dendritic recordings made from higher order (second or third)
dendrites (n ϭ 13) revealed that action potential attenuation was
increased after dendritic branching, proceeding with a steeper
average slope of 9% per 10 ␮m (Fig. 2 B, F). To ascertain in any
given dendrite whether a branch point-induced decrease in action
potential backpropagation occurred, recordings were made from
the same dendrite at sites before and after a branch. For an
average dendritic electrode separation of 16.5 ␮m, an average
decrease in action potential amplitude of 27.4% was observed
(Fig. 2 B, inset). This value is greater than that found for action
potential attenuation along an unbranched dendrite, emphasizing
the deleterious effects of dendritic branching on action potential
backpropagation. The attenuation of slower voltage changes of

the membrane were measured by plotting the degree of steadystate voltage attenuation from soma to dendrite (determined at
the termination of small, negative, 200 –500 msec somatic current
steps that evoked voltage deviations of Ͻ5 mV at the soma). The
degree of steady-state attenuation was found to be 2.9% per 10
␮m along stem dendrites and 4% per 10 ␮m when recordings
were made after dendritic branching (Fig. 2C), indicating that
steady-state attenuation is not noticeably effected by dendritic
branching. The relationship between action potential and steadystate voltage attenuation was found to be close to 1 for recordings
made from stem dendrites, but Ͻ1 for recordings made after
dendritic branching (Fig. 2 D). This suggests that action potential
backpropagation is active; that is, it is reliant on the activation of
dendritic voltage-activated ionic currents, because a near-unity
relationship between action potential and steady-state attenuation in stem dendrites would not be expected for a passive system.

Distribution of sodium and potassium channels
Somatic and dendritic cell-attached recordings (n ϭ 46) were
used to map the distribution and basic properties of sodium and
potassium channels. From a pipette voltage of 0 mV [i.e., from the
resting membrane potential (RMP) of the cell], a Ϫ40 mV, 500
msec prepulse was used to remove steady-state inactivation, fol-

1310 J. Neurosci., February 15, 2000, 20(4):1307–1317

Williams and Stuart • Action Potential Backpropagation in TC Neurons

Figure 2. Action potential backpropagation into the dendrites of TC neurons. A, Simultaneous somatic and dendritic
recordings of action potentials evoked by somatic current
injection. Dendritic recordings were sequentially made from
the first branch point of a stem dendrite (35 ␮m from the
soma/dendrite intersection), from the stem dendrite (20
␮m), and from one of its daughter dendrites (62 ␮m). Note
changes in action potential onset, the abrupt decrease in
amplitude, and increase in action potential duration for
recordings made at and after the dendritic branch point. B,
Pooled data demonstrate the relationship between action
potential amplitude and dendritic recording location for
recordings made from stem (E) and higher order (F) dendrites. All data from simultaneous somatic and dendritic
recordings. The average amplitude of somatic action potentials (ϮSD) is shown as the filled square. Lines represent
regression analysis, constrained to the average somatic action potential amplitude. The inset shows the degree of
reduction of action potential amplitude for recordings made
before (E) and after (F) a branch point from the same
dendrite. C, Normalized steady-state attenuation of small
negative voltage responses evoked at the soma for recordings made from stem (E) and higher order dendrites (F).
Lines represent regression analysis, constrained at origin to
1. D, Relationship between normalized steady-state attenuation and normalized action potential attenuation for recordings made from stem (E) and higher order dendrites
(F); the line has a slope of 1.

Figure 3. Properties and somato-dendritic distribution of
sodium channels. A, Three consecutive single sweeps of
cell-attached patch currents recorded from a stem dendrite.
Note the clear appearance of a fast inward current followed
by a slower outward current. The bottom trace is an average
(n ϭ 30 trials), and the dashed line represents a fit to the
rising and decaying phase of the outward current (see Materials and Methods). Note that extrapolation of this fit
indicates that there is no significant outward current activation at the time of the peak of the inward current. The
voltage protocol is shown as an inset. B, Superposed averaged (n ϭ 5 trials) cell-attached current records demonstrate the voltage dependence of activation of the fast inward current; data were obtained from a dendritic primary
branch point. The dashed lines represent fits made to the rise
and decay of the outward current. The voltage protocol is
shown as an inset. C, Pooled data demonstrating the somatodendritic distribution of the fast inward (sodium) current
during test pulses to ϩ90 mV, as shown in A. The line is an
unconstrained regression fit. Filled squares show mean
(ϮSD) current as a function of distance from the soma
(ϮSD) for recordings made from the soma, stem dendrites,
primary branch points. and higher order dendrites (from left
to right, respectively). Note that for higher order dendrites
the amplitude of the fast inward (sodium) current is on
average reduced. D, Normalized current–voltage relationship. Families of currents for a single neuron were normalized to the maximal value, and then data from different
neurons were pooled (n ϭ 13).

lowed by a positive test pulse to ϩ90 mV. The mean whole-cell
RMP of neurons was Ϫ73 Ϯ 1 mV; therefore, the voltage change
of the membrane will be from approximately Ϫ113 mV to ϩ17
mV. When the contribution of a liquid-junction and Donnan
equilibrium potentials are considered (Verheugen et al., 1999),
however, the true resting potential of neurons is probably closer

to Ϫ80 mV. Figure 3 demonstrates examples of cell-attached
patch currents during steps to these test potentials, which were
characterized by a fast transient inward current followed by a
bi-phasic outward current. This ensemble channel activity was
variable from trial to trial (Fig. 3A). An incremental series (ϩ30
to ϩ 150 mV) of positive test pulses were used to establish the

Williams and Stuart • Action Potential Backpropagation in TC Neurons

nature of these currents (Fig. 3B). The fast inward current first
activated ϳ40 mV positive to RMP, peaked close to ϳ80 mV
positive to RMP, and demonstrated voltage-dependent activation
kinetics (Fig. 3 B, D). This current was substantially inactivated by
omitting the hyperpolarizing prepulse or applying small positive
(20 mV) prepulses (data not shown). Given that calcium currents
were blocked under our recording conditions, this cell-attached
inward current is most likely a fast sodium current (INa) (Parri
and Crunelli, 1998). The amplitude of INa was found to be
variable from patch to patch, but on average it was similar for
recordings made from the soma, stem dendrites, and at the first
dendritic branch point (Fig. 3C). The average amplitude of INa in
recordings made from higher order dendrites was found, however,
to be relatively smaller than those recorded from the soma ( p Ͻ
0.05, t test) (Fig. 3C). At the test potential used to assess sodium
channel density, the amplitude of the fast inward current was
minimally distorted by the presence of outward currents because
the activation of outward currents was relatively slow and possessed a sigmoidal time course. The predicted time course of the
outward current is shown by extrapolation from fits made to the
rise and decay of the outward current in Figure 3 A, B. Note that
at the peak of INa little outward current is activated.
INa was followed by a bi-phasic outward current, which was
characterized by a relatively fast transient component that, in
turn, was followed by a more sustained component (Fig. 4 A, B).
The relative fraction of these kinetically distinct components was
variable at different locations in the same neuron (Fig. 4 A). The
amplitude of the transient current was calculated by subtraction of
the value of the steady-state current at the end of the test pulse
(used to measure the sustained current) from the peak of the
current. We observed that some patches appeared to contain only
one of these components (data not shown). On average, however,
despite a large degree of interpatch variability, these channels
were found to be uniformly distributed on the soma, stem, and
higher order dendrites (Fig. 4C,D). The uniform density of outward currents is in contrast to that of INa, indicating that any
contamination of INa measurement by potassium currents would
be similar at all somato-dendritic locations. The kinetic properties
(Fig. 4 B) of these ensemble channel activities are similar to the
transient IA-like and more slowly inactivating delayed rectifier
potassium currents identified by whole-cell recording in TC neurons (Huguenard and Prince, 1991; Huguenard et al., 1991).
Furthermore, the transient component of the current was found
to activate from more hyperpolarized membrane potentials (Fig.
4 B), as is the case for whole-cell IA-like currents. It should be
noted, however, that the voltage dependence of activation of this
transient outward current may have been shifted in the depolarized direction by the inclusion of calcium channel blockers in the
patch pipette-filling solution (Mayer and Sugiyama, 1988; Klee et
al., 1995). In summary, cell-attached recordings demonstrate that
potassium channels are localized in the dendrites of TC neurons
at densities similar to those of the soma.

Active action potential backpropagation
To directly test the influence of dendritic voltage-activated channels on backpropagation of action potentials, we made simultaneous whole-cell somatic and dendritic recordings under control
conditions, and then for each neuron examined (n ϭ 16) we used
the somatically recorded action potential as a somatic voltageclamp command waveform to ascertain action potential attenuation in the presence of the sodium channel blocker TTX (Stuart
and Sakmann, 1994). In these experiments care was taken to

J. Neurosci., February 15, 2000, 20(4):1307–1317 1311

Figure 4. Properties and somato-dendritic distribution of potassium
channels. A, Averaged (n ϭ 30 trails) cell-attached patch currents obtained from the indicated somato-dendritic locations of a single neuron.
Note that the amplitude and the relative contribution of the transient and
sustained outward currents is variable from patch to patch. B, A family of
superposed cell-attached patch currents demonstrate the voltagedependent activation properties of the transient and sustained outward
currents, obtained from a stem dendritic patch. The voltage protocol is
shown as an inset. C, Pooled data demonstrating the somato-dendritic
distribution of the transient outward current. The line is an unconstrained
regression fit. Filled squares show mean (ϮSD) current as a function of
distance from the soma (ϮSD) for recordings made from the soma, stem
dendrites, primary branch points, and higher order dendrites (from left to
right, respectively). D, Pooled data demonstrating the somato-dendritic
distribution of the sustained outward current, as in C.

achieve stable, low series resistance somatic recordings (Ͻ8 M⍀,
pipette resistance 2–3 M⍀, which was compensated for by Ͼ95%,
in the presence of lag values of Ͻ3 ␮sec). Using this technique we
observed that the blockade of sodium channels by bath application of TTX greatly reduced the amplitude of dendritic action
potentials (Fig. 5 A, C), decreasing the slope of action potential
attenuation with distance from 4.3% per 10 ␮m to 11.9% per 10
␮m. To verify the voltage change at the soma produced by the
injection of action potential voltage-command waveforms, we
made subsequent double somatic recordings in 10 of 16 neurons
and observed that the voltage change produced was on average
95.8% of the original somatic action potential amplitude (Fig.
5 A, C). These findings, therefore, directly demonstrate that action
potential backpropagation in TC neurons is active and dependent
on dendritic sodium channel activation.

Dendritic filtering of action potential burst firing
During burst firing, the attenuation of the first action potential of
a burst mirrored that of action potentials evoked in single-spike
firing mode (slope reduction along stem dendrites 4.2% per 10
␮m; after branch points 9.1% per 10 ␮m). Each action potential
of a burst was recorded first at soma. Surprisingly, however, we
observed that when backpropagating action potentials were re-

1312 J. Neurosci., February 15, 2000, 20(4):1307–1317

Figure 5. Active dendritic action potential backpropagation. A, The top
traces show simultaneous somatic and dendritic whole-cell current-clamp
recordings demonstrating action potential attenuation under control conditions. The soma was then voltage-clamped, and the control somatic
action potential was used as a voltage command. The middle traces
demonstrate the relatively small dendritic voltage response evoked by the
somatic action potential voltage command in the presence of the sodium
channel blocker tetrodotoxin (TTX ). The bottom traces show the actual
voltage deviation produced at the soma by the somatic action potential
voltage command (thick trace) during double somatic recording. B, Video
image of the neuron and the location of somatic and dendritic (white
asterisk) recording electrodes. The white arrows show the location of major
dendritic branch points, and the black arrow indicates a small collateral
dendrite. C, Pooled data from 16 experiments showing the ratio of
dendritic action potential amplitude in the presence of TTX versus that in
control at different dendritic locations. The ratio of voltage changes
recorded at the soma during control and in TTX, obtained during double
somatic recordings, is shown as open circles. The line represents the result
of linear regression analysis.

corded after dendritic branch points, the degree of attenuation of
subsequent action potentials in a burst was less than that of the
first (Fig. 6 A). When recorded from the soma, later action potentials in a burst showed a reduction in amplitude and a slowing of
rise and decay times (Fig. 6 A). Backpropagating action potentials
recorded after dendritic branch points, however, showed an apparent equalization of amplitude, where the first action potential
of a burst was attenuated to the greatest extent (slope reduction
along stem dendrites for third action potential of a burst 3.7% per
10 ␮m; after branch points 7.4% per 10 ␮m) (Fig. 6 A). This effect
is quantified in Figure 6 B by plotting the difference in amplitude
of the first and third action potentials recorded at the soma,
relative to their differential amplitude when recorded dendritically. Along stem dendrites, a near unity relationship exists that
collapses after dendritic branching (Fig. 6 B). These effects were
not a consequence of sodium channel activation/inactivation because they were also observed in the presence of TTX, after the
injection of a voltage-clamp waveform composed of an action
potential burst at the soma. Furthermore, scaling of this burst
voltage-clamp waveform by one-half did not modify the normalization of dendritic action potential amplitude (data not shown),
suggesting that these effects are not dependent on the influence of
potassium or calcium channels but are likely to reflect the more
effective passive propagation through dendritic branch points of

Williams and Stuart • Action Potential Backpropagation in TC Neurons

Figure 6. Filtering of action potential burst firing by dendritic branch
points. A, Top, Simultaneous somatic (thin trace) and secondary dendritic
(thick trace) whole-cell recordings during a burst of action potentials
evoked by somatic current injection. Note that the amplitude of somatic
action potentials decreases during the burst, but the amplitude of dendritic action potentials increases. Bottom, This effect is shown more
clearly at a faster time base, where the first dendritic action potential
(thick trace) has been scaled to equal the amplitude of the first somatic
action potential. B, The relative difference in first and third action
potential amplitude, when measured from the soma and dendrite. Note a
near-unity relationship exists for recordings made from stem dendrites
(E), but this relationship collapses after dendritic branching (F).

the slowly rising and broader action potentials that occurred later
in the burst.

Properties of calcium channels in
cell-attached patches
Cell-attached recordings, made in the presence of TTX and with
a TEA-based, barium-rich pipette solution (n ϭ 60), demonstrated that an isolated transient inward current was evoked in
both the soma and dendrites in response to voltage steps from
approximately Ϫ113 to Ϫ33 mV (Fig. 7A). This cell-attached
current was of low amplitude, variable from trial to trial, but
clearly discernible in single trials (Fig. 7A). An increase in test
pulse amplitude led to the additional appearance of a sustained
inward current in some patches (Fig. 7B). The construction of
current–voltage relationships revealed that this transient inward
current was first activated from potentials ϳ20 mV positive to
RMP, reaching a peak at ϳ75 mV positive to RMP, whereas the
sustained component was first activated from potentials ϳ50 mV

Williams and Stuart • Action Potential Backpropagation in TC Neurons

Figure 7. Calcium channel activation in the dendrites of TC neurons. A,
Cell-attached patch currents recorded from a secondary dendrite with
pipette solutions designed to block sodium and potassium currents (see
Materials and Methods). Three sequential single trials demonstrate the
presence of an isolated transient inward current, which is shown more
clearly in the average (n ϭ 50 trials). The voltage protocol is shown as an
inset. B, An additional sustained current was evoked by increasing the
magnitude of the test pulse.

positive to RMP (Fig. 8 A, C). The kinetics of activation and
inactivation of the transient current were found to be voltage
dependent (Fig. 8 A). Furthermore, the transient inward current
could be steady-state inactivated by applying prepulses (1 sec
duration) of varying amplitude (Fig. 8 B). We constructed steadystate activation and inactivation curves for ensemble IT currents
recorded from the majority of patches (Fig. 8 D). When pooled
from all recording sites, steady-state activation and inactivation
curves were found to be well fit with single Boltzmann functions,
with slopes of 13.6 and 11.8, respectively. A better approximation
of the steady-state activation curve could be made, however, by
raising the Boltzmann function to the third power (Fig. 8 D). A
considerable voltage overlap was found between these curves,
indicating that under ideal voltage-clamp conditions a nonnegligible window current exists (Fig. 8 D) (Williams et al., 1997).
Furthermore, the slope of these steady-state curves was found to
be shallower than those reported for whole-cell recordings made
from intact or dissociated TC neurons (Coulter et al., 1989;
Crunelli et al., 1989; Destexhe et al., 1998). This was not a
product of data pooling because we observed steepness values of
between 5.5 to 16.6 (activation) and 7.6 to 19.9 (inactivation) in
individual recordings, indicating that previous estimates of these
parameters may have been compromised by the recording configuration and conditions (Destexhe et al., 1998). These voltagedependent and kinetic properties identify the transient inward
current as a low-threshold calcium current, IT, and the sustained
current as a high-threshold calcium current (Coulter et al., 1989;
Crunelli et al., 1989; Hernandez-Cruz and Pape, 1989; Mouginot
et al., 1997).

Distribution of low-threshold calcium channels
We mapped the distribution of IT channels and observed that the
kinetic properties of these channels were similar in patches derived from the soma, stem, and higher order dendrites (Fig. 9A).
The amplitude of ensemble currents, however, was found to be on
average significantly larger (ANOVA, p Ͻ 0.05) in recordings
made from the stem dendrite compared with somatic and higher
order dendritic locations (Fig. 9B). To our surprise we obtained

J. Neurosci., February 15, 2000, 20(4):1307–1317 1313

Figure 8. Steady-state properties of low-threshold calcium channels. A,
Superposed cell-attached current traces used for the construction of
steady-state activation curves during test pulses from ϩ15 to ϩ65 mV in
5 mV steps. Each trace is an average of five trials. The inset shows the
voltage-dependent activation kinetics of the current at a faster time base.
B, A family of current traces used for the construction of steady-state
inactivation curves during prepulses from Ϫ40 to 40 mV in 10 mV steps.
The insets show the voltage-dependent kinetics of this current at a faster
time base. C, Current–voltage relationship of the current shown in A
when measured at peak amplitude (F) or immediately before the termination of the test pulse (E). D, Pooled steady-state activation (F) and
inactivation (E) curves; each point represents mean Ϯ SEM. The solid
curves were fit with single Boltzmann functions (see Material and Methods). A better approximation of the activation curve was found by raising
the Boltzmann function to the third power (dashed line). Note the voltage
overlap between curves. Voltages are relative to resting membrane
potential.

many somatic patches that did not show any, or demonstrated
very little, calcium channel activity. Furthermore, little calcium
channel activity was found in our most distal dendritic recordings
(Fig. 9B).
When the voltage dependence of activation and steady-state
inactivation were examined at different somato-dendritic locations, we observed a small parallel shift in the midpoint values of
steady-state activation and inactivation curves (soma: 52.9 mV,
activation, 4.5 mV, inactivation; primary dendrite branch: 59.6
mV, activation, 11.92 mV, inactivation; all potentials are relative
to RMP) in the depolarized direction for recordings made from
the most distal sites (i.e., at dendritic branch points and from
higher order dendrites) (Fig. 9C). These effects were not produced by differences in RMP between somatic and dendritic sites
because we observed no noticeable differences in RMP across the
somato-dendritic area examined. In summary, these data directly
demonstrate that low-threshold calcium channels have a predominant dendritic distribution and that the profile of this distribution is nonuniform and highest in stem dendrites.

Local dendritic regenerative activity
We sought to explore whether a predominate dendritic location
of IT channels led to any unique effects when current was directly
injected into the dendrites of TC neurons (Fig. 10). Simultaneous
somatic and dendritic current-clamp recordings demonstrated
that as the somatic membrane potential was changed by tonic

1314 J. Neurosci., February 15, 2000, 20(4):1307–1317

Figure 9. Somato-dendritic distribution and properties of low-threshold
calcium channels. A, Selected averaged traces demonstrating the relationship between current amplitude and recording location. Note that the
transient inward current is of the same kinetics at each recording location,
but of relatively greater amplitude when recorded from stem dendrites.
Somatic and stem dendritic patches were taken from the same neuron. B,
Pooled data quantifying the relationship between current density and
dendritic location. Each recording is shown as an open circle. Filled squares
show mean (ϮSD) current as a function of distance from the soma (ϮSD)
for recordings made from the soma, stem dendrites, primary branch
points, and higher order dendrites (from left to right, respectively). C,
Steady-state activation and inactivation curves constructed from data
pooled by recording location, as shown in the inset. Note that more distal
dendritic recordings yield activation and inactivation curves that are
shifted to the right along the voltage axis. Voltages are relative to resting
membrane potential.

somatic current injection, the firing response of TC neurons in
response to small positive somatic current steps changed from
single spike to the burst firing of action potentials in a voltagedependent manner, as has been described previously (Deschenes
et al., 1982; Llinas and Jahnsen, 1982). This transformation was
produced by the activation of an LTCP. When this experiment
was repeated by controlling membrane potential with tonic current injection through the dendritic pipette and voltage responses
were evoked by small positive dendritic current steps, a similar
transformation of firing pattern was observed. The charging pattern of the membrane was altered (Fig. 10, right, arrows), however,
in 5 of 30 recordings during dendritic current steps, as a consequence of the generation of smaller amplitude transient depolarizing potential that proceeded the full blown LTCP. This potential was of greatest amplitude when recorded locally in the
dendrite and was significantly attenuated at the somatic recording
site (Fig. 10). The voltage dependence of this local transient
depolarizing potential was similar to that of the LTCP, suggesting
that it is mediated by the activation of dendritic IT channels.
These data, therefore, suggest that local voltage-dependent pro-

Williams and Stuart • Action Potential Backpropagation in TC Neurons

Figure 10. Local regenerative activity in the dendrites of TC neurons.
All traces were recorded during simultaneous somatic (thin traces) and
secondary dendritic recording. The membrane potential was controlled by
tonic current injection through the somatic (left) or dendritic (right)
electrode, and voltage responses were evoked by 100 pA current steps
(bottom traces) delivered to either the somatic (left) or dendritic (right)
recording electrode. In response to somatic current injection the neuron
showed a voltage-dependent firing pattern, characterized by the generation of a low-frequency train of action potentials at the most depolarized
membrane potential and a burst of action potentials crowning a lowthreshold calcium potential at more hyperpolarized membrane potentials.
In response to dendritic current injection, low-threshold calcium potentials are proceeded by a smaller transient depolarizing potential (arrows).
This potential could be evoked in isolation at the most hyperpolarized
test potential. Note the degree of attenuation of this transient depolarizing potential from dendrite to soma. The resting membrane potential of
this neurons was Ϫ70 mV.

cesses can occur in relative isolation in the dendrites of TC
neurons.

DISCUSSION
We show that action potentials evoked by sensory or cortical
EPSPs are initiated near the soma and actively backpropagate
into the dendrites of TC neurons. Backpropagation is compromised, however, by the properties of dendritic branches coupled
with a declining density of dendritic sodium channels, indicating
that backpropagation may fail to effect synaptic integration in the
distal dendrites of TC neurons. We further show that lowthreshold calcium channels are nonuniformly distributed in TC
neuron dendrites. A high density of these channels at sites that
are known to receive excitatory synaptic connections from pri-

Williams and Stuart • Action Potential Backpropagation in TC Neurons

mary afferents suggests that IT channels play a key role in the
amplification of sensory input to TC neurons.

Site of action potential initiation and active
dendritic backpropagation
Our simultaneous recordings demonstrated that action potentials
were recorded first at the soma and subsequently in the dendrites
of TC neurons. Because the axon of rat dLGN TC neurons arises
from the soma (Grossman et al., 1973; Williams et al., 1996), these
data indicate that action potentials are probably initiated at axonal sites, as shown in other central neurons (Stuart et al., 1997b).
After axonal initiation, dendritic action potential backpropagation has been shown to be reliant on the activation of dendritic
voltage-activated sodium channels in a number of central neurons
(Johnston et al., 1996; Stuart et al., 1997b). The density of sodium
channels in TC neurons was on average constant across recordings made from the soma to the first branch point of stem
dendrites. In daughter dendrites, however, we observed a reduction in sodium channel density. The density of potassium channels underlying a fast transient (IA-like) current and more slowly
inactivating delayed rectifier type current was found to be on
average constant across the somatodendritic area examined,
which corresponds to approximately one-half the path length of
TC neuron dendrites. Such channel distributions appear to be
unique, because in pyramidal neurons of the hippocampus and
neocortex, potassium channels with different properties are differentially distributed between the soma and dendrites (Hoffman
et al., 1997; Bekkers and Stuart, 1998). The measured channel
densities should therefore be considered in future dendritic models of TC neurons (Lytton et al., 1996; Antal et al., 1997). The
active nature of action potential backpropagation in TC neurons
was confirmed by comparing dendritic voltage responses in the
absence and presence of TTX. A decrease in sodium channel
density in daughter dendrites may help to explain the observation
that action potential backpropagation is compromised after the
branching of stem dendrites. The control of action potential
backpropagation, however, is influenced not only by channel
densities but also by dendritic morphology.

Influence of dendritic geometry
Modeling studies have demonstrated that action potential propagation through branched cable structures is critically dependent
on cable geometry (Goldstein and Rall, 1974; Luscher and
Shiner, 1990; Manor et al., 1991; Hausser et al., 1998). Action
potential propagation through a dichotomously branched uniformly excitable cable occurs without amplitude degradation if
the input impedance of the parent cable matches that of the
daughter cables (Goldstein and Rall, 1974). For a cable of infinite
length, this relationship holds if the diameter of the cables after
the branch raised to the power 3/2 equals that of the parent cable
raised to the power 3/2, yielding a geometrical ratio (GR) that
equals 1 (Goldstein and Rall, 1974). If GR is greater than 1, a
time-delay and decrease in action potential amplitude at and after
the branch point occurs (Goldstein and Rall, 1974; Luscher and
Shiner, 1990; Manor et al., 1991). It should be noted that invasion
of a particular branch of an axon or dendrite is influenced not
only by the GR of the branch point that an action potential
immediately encounters but by the GR of other more distal
branch points, within certain electrotonic limits (Manor et al.,
1991; Hausser et al., 1998), and that the summed influence of such
mismatches is supralinear (Manor et al., 1991). Consistent with a
deleterious effect of dendritic branching on action potential back-

J. Neurosci., February 15, 2000, 20(4):1307–1317 1315

propagation, we find that a shallower relationship exists, on
average, between backpropagating action potential amplitude and
distance of dendritic recordings from soma along unbranched
stem dendrites as compared with those made after branch points
(Fig. 2). Furthermore, recordings made from the same dendrite
before and after a branch point indicate that attenuation of action
potentials over a finite distance is greater for a branching dendrite
than for an unbranched dendrite.
Anatomical studies have demonstrated that the dichotomously
branched dendrites of TC neurons do not obey Ralls power law
(Kniffki et al., 1993; Ohara et al., 1995). The degree of variation
from GR ϭ 1 is dependent on the branch number; stem dendrites
of TC neurons branch many times (average values between 7 and
25, depending on species and nuclei) to form a large number (1 to
Ͼ40) of terminal dendrites (Havton and Ohara, 1993; Kniffki et
al., 1993; Ohara and Havton, 1994; Ohara et al., 1995). Average
GR values of near 1 (but with scatter from 0.7–1.3) (Bloomfield et
al., 1987), 1.4 (Ohara et al., 1995), and 1.72 (Kniffki et al., 1993)
have been obtained at the first stem to nonterminal dendritic
branch, whereas values Ͼ4 –5 have been observed for more distal
fifth to seventh order branches (Kniffki et al., 1993; Ohara et al.,
1995). These data are therefore compatible with our electrophysiological findings and suggest that action potential backpropagation is controlled in TC neurons according to the following
scheme: (1) impedance mismatch at dendritic branch points directly compromises backpropagation; (2) as a corollary more
highly branched dendrites hamper backpropagation to a greater
extent and (3) combined with the lower sodium channel density in
daughter dendrites this forms a situation in which lower amplitude action potentials are less likely to activate a decreasing
number of sodium channels. Backpropagating action potentials
may therefore fail to invade the most distal dendrites of TC
neurons. The filtering effects of dendritic branch points on action
potentials of different rise and decay times generated during
action potential burst firing are consistent with this scheme,
because slower rising events will be expected to be filtered less by
impedance mismatches at dendritic branch points.
One key function of backpropagating action potentials is
thought to be the resetting of synaptic integration, produced as a
consequence of the depolarization of dendrites decreasing the
driving force for excitatory synaptic currents, and by shunting
produced by the conductance changes associated with action
potential generation (Stuart and Sakmann, 1994; Stuart et al.,
1997b; Stuart and Hausser, 1998). Backpropagating action potentials in TC neurons may be capable of effecting the dendritic
integration of the primary afferent and intrageniculate inhibitory
inputs to these cells, which are made on stem dendrites or at sites
close to the first dendritic branch points but may fail to effect
inputs from cortical neurons made at distal dendritic sites (Sherman and Guillery, 1996). Backpropagation of action potentials in
TC neurons might therefore lead to the resetting of dendritic
integration of synaptic inputs that primarily determine the receptive field properties of TC neurons (Sherman and Guillery, 1998)
while sparing inputs from the cortex that are thought to produce
slower membrane potential changes that control response mode
(i.e., single or burst firing of action potentials) (Sherman and
Guillery, 1998).

Distribution of calcium channels
The low-threshold calcium current underlies many of the complex
electrophysiological properties of TC neurons, including the generation of action potential burst firing, periodic oscillatory activ-

1316 J. Neurosci., February 15, 2000, 20(4):1307–1317

ity, and membrane potential bistability (Llinas, 1988; Steriade et
al., 1993; Williams et al., 1997). Furthermore, IT has been shown
to amplify subthreshold EPSPs and IPSPs (von Krosigk et al.,
1993; Turner et al., 1994; Williams et al., 1997; Kim and McCormick, 1998). Our dendritic recordings indicate that IT channels
are at a high density in stem dendrites and stem dendritic branch
points of TC neurons, with a lower and more patchy distribution
at the soma. Furthermore, we failed to detect IT channels in more
distal secondary dendrites. Supportive of these findings, calcium
imaging experiments have indicated the presence of low- and
high-threshold calcium channel-mediated signals in the stem dendrites of TC neurons (Munsch et al., 1997; Zhou et al., 1997). The
voltage dependence of steady-state activation and inactivation
processes of dendritic IT channels was found to be shifted in the
depolarized direction at more distal recording locations. These
properties would allow dendritic IT channels to be activated at
membrane potentials nearer firing threshold, and so extend the
role of dendritic IT channels in the amplification of synaptic
inputs. Recent modeling studies have indicated that the electrophysiological properties of TC neurons may be reproduced if IT
channels are distributed dendritically with a uniform high density
throughout their arbor (Destexhe et al., 1998). Our data, however, indicate that IT channels are nonuniformly distributed.
More extensive computer simulations are therefore required to
ascertain the consequences of a nonuniform dendritic distribution of IT channels.
In conclusion, we have directly demonstrated that the dendrites
of TC neurons contain various voltage-activated ion channels and
can support active backpropagation of action potentials and the
generation of local dendritic regenerative activity. These channel
distributions extend the functional repertoire of TC neurons and
indicate that during wakefulness and sleep dendritic ion channels
will influence synaptic integration and the generation of oscillatory activity in TC neurons.

REFERENCES
Antal K, Emri Z, Toth TI, Crunelli V (1997) Model of a thalamocortical
neurone with dendritic voltage-gated ion channels. NeuroReport
8:1063–1066.
Bekkers JM, Stuart G (1998) Distribution and properties of potassium
channels in the soma and apical dendrites of layer 5 cortical pyramidal
neurons. Soc Neurosci Abstr 24:807.8.
Bloomfield SA, Hamos JE, Sherman SM (1987) Passive cable properties
and morphological correlates of neurones in the lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat. J Physiol (Lond) 383:653– 692.
Budde T, Munsch T, Pape HC (1998) Distribution of L-type calcium
channels in rat thalamic neurones. Eur J Neurosci 10:586 –597.
Coulter DA, Huguenard JR, Prince DA (1989) Calcium currents in rat
thalamocortical relay neurones: kinetic properties of the transient,
low-threshold current. J Physiol (Lond) 414:587– 604.
Crunelli V, Kelly JS, Leresche N, Pirchio M (1987a) On the excitatory
post-synaptic potential evoked by stimulation of the optic tract in the rat
lateral geniculate nucleus. J Physiol (Lond) 384:603– 618.
Crunelli V, Kelly JS, Leresche N, Pirchio M (1987b) The ventral and
dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the rat: intracellular recordings in
vitro. J Physiol (Lond) 384:587– 601.
Crunelli V, Lightowler S, Pollard CE (1989) A T-type Ca2ϩ current
underlies low-threshold Ca2ϩ potentials in cells of the cat and rat
lateral geniculate nucleus. J Physiol (Lond) 413:543–561.
Deschenes M, Roy JP, Steriade M (1982) Thalamic bursting mechanism:
an inward slow current revealed by membrane hyperpolarization. Brain
Res 239:289 –293.
Destexhe A, Neubig M, Ulrich D, Huguenard J (1998) Dendritic lowthreshold calcium currents in thalamic relay cells. J Neurosci
18:3574 –3588.
Golding NL, Spruston N (1998) Dendritic sodium spikes are variable
triggers of axonal action potentials in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal
neurons. Neuron 21:1189 –1200.

Williams and Stuart • Action Potential Backpropagation in TC Neurons

Goldstein SS, Rall W (1974) Changes of action potential shape and
velocity for changing core conductor geometry. Biophys J 14:731–757.
Golshani P, Warren RA, Jones EG (1998) Progression of change in
NMDA, non-NMDA, and metabotropic glutamate receptor function
at the developing corticothalamic synapse. J Neurophysiol 80:143–154.
Grossman A, Lieberman AR, Webster KE (1973) A Golgi study of the
rat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. J Comp Neurol 150:441– 466.
Guido W, Weyand T (1995) Burst responses in thalamic relay cells of the
awake behaving cat. J Neurophysiol 74:1782–1786.
Hausser M, Vetter P, Roth A (1998) Action potential backpropagation
depends on dendritic geometry. Soc Neurosci Abstr 24:719.1.
Havton LA, Ohara PT (1993) Quantitative analyses of intracellularly
characterized and labelled thalamocortical projection neurons in the
ventrobasal complex of primates. J Comp Neurol 336:135–150.
Hernandez-Cruz A, Pape HC (1989) Identification of two calcium currents in acutely dissociated neurons from the rat lateral geniculate
nucleus. J Neurophysiol 61:1270 –1283.
Hoffman DA, Magee JC, Colbert CM, Johnston D (1997) K ϩ channel
regulation of signal propagation in dendrites of hippocampal pyramidal
neurons. Nature 387:869 – 875.
Huguenard JR, Prince DA (1991) Slow inactivation of a TEA-sensitive
K current in acutely isolated rat thalamic relay neurons. J Neurophysiol
66:1316 –1328.
Huguenard JR, Coulter DA, Prince DA (1991) A fast transient potassium current in thalamic relay neurons: kinetics of activation and
inactivation. J Neurophysiol 66:1304 –1315.
Johnston D, Magee JC, Colbert CM, Cristie BR (1996) Active properties of neuronal dendrites. Annu Rev Neurosci 19:165–186.
Kim U, McCormick DA (1998) The functional influence of burst and
tonic firing mode on synaptic interactions in the thalamus. J Neurosci
18:9500 –9516.
Klee R, Ficker E, Heinemann U (1995) Comparison of voltagedependent potassium currents in rat pyramidal neurons acutely isolated
from hippocampal regions CA1 and CA3. J Neurophysiol 74:1982–1995.
Kniffki K-D, Pawlak M, Vahle-Hinz C (1993) Scaling behavior of the
dendritic branches of thalamic neurons. Fractals 1:171–178.
Llinas R (1988) The intrinsic electrophysiological properties of mammalian neurons: insights into central nervous system function. Science
242:1654 –1664.
Llinas R, Jahnsen H (1982) Electrophysiology of mammalian thalamic
neurones in vitro. Nature 297:406 – 408.
Luscher HR, Shiner JS (1990) Simulation of action potential propagation in complex terminal arborizations. Biophys J 58:1389 –1399.
Lytton WW, Destexhe A, Sejnowski TJ (1996) Control of slow oscillations in the thalamocortical neuron: a computer model. Neuroscience
70:673– 684.
Magee JC, Johnston D (1997) A synaptically controlled, associative signal for Hebbian plasticity in hippocampal neurons. Science
275:209 –213.
Manor Y, Koch C, Segev I (1991) Effect of geometrical irregularities on
propagation delay in axonal trees. Biophys J 60:1424 –1437.
Mayer ML, Sugiyama K (1988) A modulatory action of divalent cations
on transient outward current in cultured rat sensory neurones. J Physiol
(Lond) 396:417– 433.
McCormick DA (1992) Neurotransmitter actions in the thalamus and
cerebral cortex and their role in neuromodulation of thalamocortical
activity. Prog Neurobiol 39:337–388.
Mouginot D, Bossu JL, Gahwiler BH (1997) Low-threshold Ca 2ϩ currents in dendritic recordings from Purkinje cells in rat cerebellar slice
cultures. J Neurosci 17:160 –170.
Munsch T, Budde T, Pape HC (1997) Voltage-activated intracellular
calcium transients in thalamic relay cells and interneurons. NeuroReport 8:2411–2418.
Ohara PT, Havton LA (1994) Dendritic architecture of rat somatosensory thalamocortical projection neurons. J Comp Neurol 341:159 –171.
Ohara PT, Ralston H, Havton LA (1995) Architecture of individual
dendrites from intracellularly labelled thalamocortical projection neurons in the ventral posterolateral and ventral posteromedial nuclei of
cat. J Comp Neurol 358:563–572.
Parri HR, Crunelli V (1998) Sodium current in rat and cat thalamocortical neurons: role of a non-inactivating component in tonic and burst
firing. J Neurosci 18:854 – 867.
Perez Velazquez JL, Carlen PL (1996) Development of firing patterns
and electrical properties in neurons of the rat ventrobasal thalamus.
Brain Res Dev Brain Res 91:164 –170.

Williams and Stuart • Action Potential Backpropagation in TC Neurons

Ralston H, Herman MM (1969) The fine structure of neurons and synapses in ventrobasal thalamus of the cat. Brain Res 14:77–97.
Schiller J, Schiller Y, Stuart G, Sakmann B (1997) Calcium action potentials restricted to distal apical dendrites of rat neocortical pyramidal
neurons. J Physiol (Lond) 505:605– 616.
Sherman SM, Guillery RW (1996) Functional organization of thalamocortical relays. J Neurophysiol 76:1367–1395.
Sherman SM, Guillery RW (1998) On the actions that one nerve cell can
have on another: distinguishing “drivers” from “modulators”. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 95:7121–7126.
Spruston N, Schiller Y, Stuart G, Sakmann B (1995) Activity-dependent
action potential invasion and calcium influx into hippocampal CA1
dendrites. Science 268:297–300.
Steriade M, Deschenes M (1984) The thalamus as a neuronal oscillator.
Brain Res 320:1– 63.
Steriade M, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ (1993) Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused brain. Science 262:679 – 685.
Stuart G, Hausser M (1998) Shunting of EPSPs by action potentials. Soc
Neurosci Abstr 24:718.3.
Stuart GJ, Sakmann B (1994) Active propagation of somatic action potentials into neocortical pyramidal cell dendrites. Nature 367:69 –72.
Stuart G, Schiller J, Sakmann B (1997a) Action potential initiation and
propagation in rat neocortical pyramidal neurons. J Physiol (Lond)
505:617– 632.
Stuart G, Spruston N, Sakmann B, Hausser M (1997b) Action potential
initiation and backpropagation in neurons of the mammalian CNS.
Trends Neurosci 20:125–131.

J. Neurosci., February 15, 2000, 20(4):1307–1317 1317

Turner JP, Salt TE (1998) Characterization of sensory and corticothalamic excitatory inputs to rat thalamocortical neurones in vitro.
J Physiol (Lond) 510:829 – 843.
Turner JP, Leresche N, Guyon A, Soltesz I, Crunelli V (1994) Sensory
input and burst firing output of rat and cat thalamocortical cells: the
role of NMDA and non-NMDA receptors. J Physiol (Lond)
480:281–295.
Verheugen JA, Fricker D, Miles R (1999) Noninvasive measurements of
the membrane potential and GABAergic action in hippocampal interneurons. J Neurosci 19:2546 –2555.
von Krosigk M, Bal T, McCormick DA (1993) Cellular mechanisms of a
synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science 261:361–364.
Warren RA, Jones EG (1997) Maturation of neuronal form and function in a mouse thalamo-cortical circuit. J Neurosci 17:277–295.
Warren RA, Golshani P, Jones EG (1997) GABA(B)-receptormediated inhibition in developing mouse ventral posterior thalamic
nucleus. J Neurophysiol 78:550 –553.
Williams SR, Turner JP, Anderson CM, Crunelli V (1996) Electrophysiological and morphological properties of interneurones in the rat
dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus in vitro. J Physiol (Lond) 490:129 –147.
Williams SR, Toth TI, Turner JP, Hughes SW, Crunelli V (1997) The
“window” component of the low threshold Ca2ϩ current produces
input signal amplification and bistability in cat and rat thalamocortical
neurones. J Physiol (Lond) 505:689 –705.
Zhou Q, Godwin DW, O’Malley DM, Adams PR (1997) Visualization
of calcium influx through channels that shape the burst and tonic firing
modes of thalamic relay cells. J Neurophysiol 77:2816 –2825.

