Journal of Physiology (1989), 416, pp. l1l-122
With 3 text-figures

111

Printed in Great Britain

INTRINSIC PROPERTIES OF NUCLEUS RETICULARIS THALAMI
NEURONES OF THE RAT STUDIED IN VITRO

BY GIULIANO AVANZINI, MARCO DE CURTIS, FERRUCCIO PANZICA AND
ROBERTO SPREAFICO
From the Dipartimento di Neurofisiologia, Istituto Neurologico 'C. Besta',
via Celoria 11, 20133 Milan, Italy

(Received 16 August 1988)
SUMMARY

1. Neurones of the nucleus reticularis thalami of the rat were studied by
intracellular recordings from in vitro slices. The resting membrane potential was
-56-28 + 5-86 mV (mean value + S.D.); input resistance was 43 09 + 9 74 MQ; the
time constant r was 16-51 + 3-99 ms. At the resting membrane potential tonic firing
is present, while at membrane potentials more negative than -60 mV a burst firing
mode gradually prevails.
2. Prolonged depolarizing current pulses superimposed on a steady hyperpolarization consistently activated sequences of burst-after-hyperpolarization complexes. The all-or-none burst response consisted of Na+-mediated, TTX-sensitive fast
action potentials superimposed on a low threshold spike (LTS). The burst was
followed by a stereotyped after-hyperpolarization lasting 100-120 ms (BAHP), with
a maxima -85 mV. The BAHP was blocked by Cd2' and apamine but not by 8-Br
cyclic AMP. The early component of BAHP was significantly attenuated by TEA.
The oscillatory rhythmic discharges were abolished by agents which blocked the
BAHP.
3. The presence of strong after-hyperpolarizing potentials (SAHP and BAHP) in
RTN neurones plays a significant role in determining two different functional states,
defined as tonic and oscillatory burst firing modes, respectively.

INTRODUCTION

The nucleus reticularis thalami (RTN) is composed of a sheet-like aggregation of
GABAergic small neurones (Houser, Vaughn, Barber & Roberts, 1980) which
envelopes the dorsolateral and anterior portions of the dorsal thalamus. It receives
collaterals from the corticothalamic and thalamocortical fibres and projects
exclusively to the dorsal thalamic nuclei (Jones, 1975); moreover, intrareticular axon
collaterals of RTN cells provide an intrinsic GABAergic circuit (Yen, Conley, Hendry
& Jones, 1985; Spreafico, Frassoni, Battaglia & Schmechel, 1984; De Biasi, Frassoni
& Spreafico, 1986).
Several lines of evidence suggest that the RTN is involved in generation of the
oscillatory activity responsible for cortical spindles during states of decreased

112

G. A VANZINI AND OTHERS

vigilance (Steriade & Deschenes, 1984; Steriade, Domich & Oakson, 1986; Steriade,
Domich, Oakson & Deschenes, 1987).
Recently Mulle, Madariaga & Deschenes (1986), in an in vivo study in cats,
investigated using intracellular recording the spindle-related rhythmic spike burst
activity observed in RTN neurones during barbiturate anaesthesia. The comparison
with the intrinsic membrane properties previously reported by Deschenes, Paradis,
Roy & Steriade (1984) in in vivo cats and by Jahnsen & Llinas (1984a, b) in in vitro
guinea-pig thalamic slices led Mulle et al. (1986) to outline some peculiarities in the
location and relative predominances of conductances, which could support a specific
role for the RTN in pacemaking thalamic spindle oscillation.
In the present study the use of an in vitro preparation of thalamic slices allowed
a further electrophysiological and pharmacological characterization of membrane
properties which account for the different firing modes of rat RTN neurones. Ca2+dependent outward conductances underlying the after-hyperpolarizations which
follow single spike tonic firing or burst discharges could be differentiated and related
to the ability of RTN neurones to produce rhythmic activities. A preliminary report
of some of these data has been published in abstract (Avanzini, de Curtis & Spreafico,
1987).
METHODS

Experiments were carried out on RTN neurones of young adult Sprague-Dawley rats (150-250
g). The animals were decapitated by guillotine under light ether anaesthesia. The brain was quickly
removed and immersed in artificial cerebrospinal fluid at a temperature of 4 'C. A block of brain
tissue containing the thalamus was dissected from each hemisphere 400-500 /um thick horizontal
thalamic slices were prepared with a vibratome, transferred to the superfusion recording chamber
and incubated for at least 1 h before recordings were started. The temperature of the bathing
medium was maintained at 36 'C and a humidified gas mixture of 95% 02- 5% CO2 was bubbled
into the bath during the experiment.
Under a binocular microscope the RTN was recognized as a thin grey band located between the
internal capsule and the external medullary lamina; the thalamocortical radiation fibres were
clearly visible as white bundles across the RTN.
Intracellular recordings from the portion of the RTN enveloping the ventrobasal nucleus were
performed using glass micropipettes (resistance 80-120 mQ) filled with 4 M-potassium acetate.
Extracellular stimuli were applied through monopolar tungsten electrodes placed in the internal
capsule and in the dorsal thalamus, close to the recording site, in order to induce a synaptic
activation of the neurones. The membrane potentials were recorded with a Neurodata Instrument,
Corp. (USA) pre-amplifier provided with a Wheatstone bridge circuit utilized to perform
intracellular current injections.
Input resistance values were calculated on the initial linear portion of current-voltage curves
produced by measuring the membrane voltage changes induced by 80-100 ms hyperpolarizing
current pulses applied through the recording microelectrode. The time constant values were
calculated by identifying an exponential function derived from the application of a least-squares
criterion to the logarithms of the data points extrapolated by the membrane deflection induced by
injections of 0-2-0-4 nA current pulses.
The data were recorded on magnetic tape (Racal FM4D) and analysed off-line by means of a
PDP 11/34 Digital computer system, together with a Tekronix 5110 digital oscilloscope and a chart
recorder (Linseis type 2045). Only data from those neurones producing prolonged (> 10 min),
stable recordings and with a membrane potential over -50 m\' were accepted for analysis.
The normal bathing solution contained (in mM): NaCl, 124; KCl, 25; CaCl2, 2; MgSO4, 2;
NaH2PO4, 1-25; NaHCO3, 16; dextrose, 10. When saturated with humidified gas, the pH of the
solution was 7-4.
When 1 mM-cadmium (Cd21) was added to the solution, phosphate, sulphate and CaCl2 were
omitted and MgSO4 was replaced with MgCl2. During some experiments pharmacological agents

PROPERTIES OF RTN NEURONES IN VITRO

113

were added to the perfusion fluid without adjusting the tonicity: I 1uM-tetrodotoxin (TTX) (n =
3); 20 mM-tetraethylammonium (TEA) (n = 4); 100 ,uM-apamine (n = 3); 1 puM-8-bromo adenosine
3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (8-Br cyclic AMP) (n = 4). All drugs were purchased from Sigma.
RESULTS

The following data are from forty-six neurones from the portion of the RTN
related to the ventrobasal nucleus. The mean resting membrane potential was
-56-28 + 5-86 mV (n = 28). The mean input resistance was 43 09 + 9-74 MQ (n = 21).
Rectification was observed in the hyperpolarizing direction for values below -85
mV. In resting conditions the membrane time constant (Tm), calculated in the
interval between 10 and 30 ms after the onset of the current pulse, was 16X51 + 3-99
ms.
No spontaneous activity was recorded from the RTN neurones. Each spike was
followed by a short (20-60 ms, mean value: 35 28 + 13-34 ms, n = 26) and deep afterhyperpolarizing potential (spike after-hyperpolarizing potential, SA'HP), which
showed a short time-to-peak (mean value: 2-33 + 0-88 ms, n = 26) and a slower decay.
The SAHP persisted during prolonged recordings with KCl-filled microelectrodes
and was not blocked by bicuculline. The spike duration was reversibly prolonged by
adding TEA to the perfusion fluid; this was due to a slowing down of the spike
repolarization, together with blockage of the SAHP (Fig. 1A). Addition of 1
mM-Cd2+ to the perfusion medium also blocked the SAHP and induced a slowing
down of the action potential repolarization; this effect was reversed 40 min after the
control solution was restored (Fig. 1B).
Long-lasting depolarizing pulses caused repetitive action potential firing (Fig. 1 C).
Each spike was followed by an SAHP.
No burst or Ca2+-like action potentials were observed at membrane polarizations
at and above the resting level. The rate of repetitive firing was strictly dependent on
the amplitude of the injected current pulse, and showed a slight early accommodation
which was manifest during the first 10-20 ms of the pulse. Firing was sustained
throughout the duration of current injection (see Fig. 1 C and D). The accommodation
did not vary significantly during TEA-added perfusions (Fig. ID).
A post-train after-hyperolarizing potential followed the repetitive discharge
evoked by an intracellular depolarizing pulse (Fig. 1D). It lasted about 50-80 ms and
decayed rapidly with a time constant similar to that of the SAHP. The increased
number of action potentials evoked by increasing the depolarizing pulse duration
caused a mild prolongation of this potential and no significant increase in its
amplitude, which was significantly and reversibly decreased by TEA perfusions (Fig.

1D).
When the membrane potential was hyperpolarized below -60 mV, a different
firing mode was generated either by orthodromic activation, by depolarizing pulses
or at the break of hyperpolarizing pulses: single spike-SAHPs were followed by an
all-or-none burst of spikes superimposed on a slow depolarizing potential (Fig. 1E
and F). The bursts lasted about 25-30 ms (mean value: 34-35 + 9-01 ms) and were
composed of four to nine fast action potentials, whose duration and amplitude were
similar throughout the duration of the burst. The initial burst firing rate was 200-300
Hz and showed a slight acceleration, which peaked between the third and fifth action

G. A VANZINI AND OTHERS

114

TEA
Control

TEA

Cdl2
Control

Cd2+
Wash

Wash

A

B

3 Ms

C VJb~ ~tLW1iV
--~~~~

~

~

120 mV
~

~~0.5 nA
25 ms

Control

D

E

TEA

Wash

~~~ControlTE
40 ms

Control

d2+

Ws

F

25 ms
neurones in resting conditions
(single spike-tonic firing mode). A, single-spike response evoked by internal capsule
stimulation; TEA (10 mM) prolonged the spike duration and reduced the SAHP in a
reversible way. B, Cd2+ (2 mM) has similar effects on the action potential occurring at the
break of an hyperpolarizing current pulse. TEA is more effective than Cd2+ in prolonging
the spike duration. C, single-spike response and tonic firing obtained by intracellular
injection of depolarizing current pulses of different duration are both followed by shortlasting hyperpolarizations. No important spike accommodation is noted during the
repetitive firing. D, the after-hyperpolarization subsequent to a train of action potentials
is blocked by TEA (10 mM). Note that during TEA addition, the same pulse intensity
induced an increase in spike number; this effect is due to the slight depolarization induced

Fig. 1. A-I), intracellular recordings from different RTN

PROPERTIES OF RTN NEURONES IiN VITRO

115

potentials and was followed by a decrease in frequency (Figs IF and 2B). On two
occasions, during recovery from a low-Ca2+, Cd2+-supplemented perfusion, it was
possible to isolate the single spike from the burst response (Fig. 1 F). When the
membrane time constants, obtained by fitting the membrane rectification preceding
the single spike and the burst with an exponential function (using a least-squares
fitting procedure), were compared a significant difference was detected. The pre-spike
time constant of 56+14 ms was significantly different from the pre-burst time
constant of 14 5 + 0-6 ms (P < 0 05). The pre-spike rectification was not influenced by
Cd2 , indicating that it was no mediated by a Ca2+ influx.
The burst was followed by a pronounced hyperpolarization which lasted 80-120
ms and was composed of a fast, TEA-sensitive (Fig. 1 E) repolarizing phase which
peaked at about 20 ms (mean value: 21P38 + 49 ms) and a slower TEA-insensitive
(Fig. 1 E) decay phase (mean value: 96 33 + 12 71 ms) which decreased monotonically.
We have called this after-hyperpolarization a 'burst after-hyperpolarization'
(BAHP). The BAHP was an all-or-none phenomenon and showed an approximately
extrapolated equilibrium potential of 85-90 mV. The determination of the reversal
potential by the injection of hyperpolarizing currents was only tentative, because of
the strict dependence of the burst-BAHP complex on the membrane potential. The
burst-BAHP complex could not be activated below -90 mV or above -60 mV. It
was abolished by Cd21 (2 mm, Fig. IF) while TTX (1 /aM) sufficient to abolish Na+
spikes uncovered a slow all-or-none depolarizing potential underlying the burst (see
below and Fig. 3A). We have called the all-or-none TTX-resistant Cd2+-sensitive slow
potential of the complex 'low threshold spike' LTS (Llina's & Yarom, 1981 a, b;
Deschenes et al. 1984; Jahnsen & Llinas, 1984a, b).

Oscillatory behaviour
When RTN neurones are stimulated directly with long-lasting (600-1000 ms) and
large (0 3-1 nA) depolarizing current pulses from a hyperpolarized level, repetitive
burst-BAHP complexes are elicited, resulting in a characteristic oscillatory
behaviour. As shown in Fig. 2A and B the decay of the outward current responsible
for each BAHP results in a depolarizing recovery phase, accompanied by a change
in membrane rectification, which leads to a subsequent burst discharge that starts
the oscillatory cycle anew. The time constant of the decaying BAIIP showed a
significant (P < 0-01) increment just before the activation of the second burst (Fig.
2B; see further analysis below). A similar set of events could also be obtained at the
break of a large hyperpolarizing pulse injection superimposed on a steady membrane
by TEA on the membrane potential. E and F, burst-BAHP complexes elicited in two
different RTN neurones by depolarizing current pulses superimposed to a steady
hyperpolarizing current which held the membrane potential at 75 and 80 mV,
respectively. E, the early phase of the BAHP is markedly slowed down during addition
of TEA. The isolated action potential preceding the burst in the control recording could
not, be distinguished from the following burst during the TEA effect. F, the isolated
potential is not abolished by prolonged Cd2+ perfusion, which completely and reversibly
blocks the burst, discharge. The variability in spike amplitude shown in the fast-speed
sweeps in this and the following figures is due to the numeric reconstruction of the events
by means of a digital oscilloscope.

G. A VANZINI AND OTHERS

116

hyperpolarization (Fig. 2A, right sweep). As shown in Fig. 2 C the optimal condition
to elicit the oscillatory activity was obtained by stepping up the membrane potential
from very hyperpolarized levels (below -90 mV in Fig. 2 C to -85 to -60 mV).
Lower depolarizing levels close to the equilibrium potential for BAHP evoked single
bursts followed by only a small hyperpolarization, while at higher depolarizing levels
close to the resting potential, a first abortive burst was followed by sustained tonic
firing (Fig. 2 C, left sweep).
A

115 mV
20 mV
__

10.5 nA
100 ms

50 ms

120 mV

t~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1.

nA

40 ms

Fig. 2. Oscillatory burst-BAAHP sequences in two neurones of the RTN. A, the sequences
are activated either by prolonged depolarizing current pulses (left) or at the break of an
hyperpolarizing current pulse (right) when the membrane potential is maintained in
hyperpolarized conditions by a steady current. B, the two early bursts in the left trace in
A are shown at a greater sweep speed. An isolated action potential precedes the first burst,
but not the second and following. C, single responses to long-lasting depolarizing pulses
starting from a membrane potential kept below -90 mV. Resting potential (dashed line)
was -58 mV. When the pulse induced a membrane shift close to resting potential, a tonic
response preceded by an abortive burst is activated. At -85 mV the BAHP subsequent
to the burst is flattened. Between -85 and -60 mV a deep BAHP is present; its rising
phase starts the burst-BAHP sequences anew. The [K+]o was 6-25 mm during the
recording.

In most of the cells, three to six consecutive oscillations could occur before the
oscillatory behaviour faded (Fig. 2A). The fade of the sequences was associated with
the progressive reduction in the amplitude of the BAHP, presumably due to a
gradual reduction in the transmembrane driving force for the ions responsible for the
BAHP (Fig. 2A). The duration of the burst increased slightly and the initial burst
spiking rate slowed down during repetitive sequences (Fig. 2A). Note again the single
action potential followed by SAHP which precedes by 2-10 ms the first burst
activated by a large and abrupt depolarization (Fig. 2B).
The addition of TTX to the medium completely abolished the burst Na+ spikes
and isolated the LTS with a rising time constant of 13-34+5 31 ms (Fig. 3A) close to
the pre-burst time constant values. Note that during TTX perfusion no oscillatory
activity could be activated, suggesting that the TTX-sensitive Na+ component fully
expressed in the pre-spike rectification could be relevant in the build up of the
regenerative inward currents responsible for the activation of the oscillatory

PROPERTIES OF RTN NEURONES IN VITRO

A
TTX

Control

20 mV
1 nA

______________|

100 Ms

TEA

Wash

Control

B

J

T

Control

JLI

LLI

Cd 2+

Wash

cJJ_

Control

Apamine

Wash

Fig. 3. Effects of different compounds on the oscillatory behaviour induced by depolarizing
pulses injected when the cell membrane was maintained at a hyperpolarized level (-90
mrV) by a DC current. A, when TTX (1 UM) is added to the perfusion fluid, the fast Na+
spikes forming the burst are blocked, uncovering the LTS. No oscillatory activity follows
the activation of LTS when a prolonged depolarizing pulse is delivered. B, TEA (10 mM)
induces an increase in the oscillating behaviour. The resting potential is -57 mV. C,
cadmium (Cd2+; 2 mM) added to the medium virtually abolishes the BAHP in an RTN
cell. The membrane resting potential is -55 mV. The blockage of the BAHP prevents the
burst sequences. The effect of Cd2+ was recovered after 40 min of wash-out. D, apamine
(100 /IM) selectively and irreversibly abolishes the BAHP and prolongs the burst duration.
No oscillatory repetitive activation is obtained during BAHP blockage, not even when a
large depolarizing current pulse is injected (right sweep). Membrane resting potential
(-58 mV) is unchanged during apamine perfusion.

117

118

G. A VANZINI AND OTHERS

behaviour. Figure 3 summarizes the main results of pharmacological tests on
repetitive burst-BAHP discharges.
The most noticeable effect of TEA was a considerable enhancement of the
tendency to discharge in burst-BAHP rhythmic sequences (Fig. 3B), even in those
neurones whose oscillating behaviour was less pronounced. The number and the
intrinsic rate of the action potentials forming the burst remained virtually
unchanged, but the BAHPs showed an increased amplitude and a slower descending
phase as compared with control recordings (see above and Fig. 1E). During TEA
perfusion the single spike which preceded the first burst response during abrupt
membrane depolarizations to potentials between -60 and -85 mV could not be
separated from the burst itself, due to the abolition of the SAHP.
Exposure to Cd2+ first caused a block of the synaptic drive, followed by a slight
depolarization of the membrane potential. After a few minutes the BAHP was
suppressed (Fig. 30) with a concurrent block of the oscillatory sequences. When the
Cd2+-added perfusion was maintained longer, the burst discharges were eventually
suppressed, as reported above (Fig. IF).
The 8-Br cyclic AMP, which is known to block selectively the Ca2+-dependent K+
current, IAHP (Lancaster & Nicoll, 1987), when tested on three cells, had no effect on
the BAHP. It also was ineffective on the SAHP and on the post-train
hyperpolarization (not shown). Apamine, which is known to selectively and
irreversibly block the Ca2+-dependent K+ currents mediated by the smallconductance Ca2+-activated K+ (SK-like) ionic channels (Pennefather, Lancaster,
Adams & Nicoll, 1985; Blatz & Magleby, 1987) responsible for 'AHP' was also tested
on three neurones. At a concentration of 100 /tM, it strongly reduced the amplitude
of the BAHP and prolonged the duration of the burst (Fig. 3D). The apamineinduced block of BAHPs was associated with a disappearance of the oscillatory
sequences. The SAHP and the hyperpolarization which followed repetitive spike
firing in resting membrane conditions was unaffected by apamine (not shown). The
effects of apamine were not reversed 1 h after restoring the control solution.

DISCUSSION

Rat RTN neurones studied on an in vitro slice preparation show two different firing
modes (see also de Curtis, Spreafico, Pauzica & Avanzini, 1988): a single spike tonic
discharge at membrane potentials above -60 mV and a burst firing, at membrane
levels below -60 mV, responsible for promoting an oscillatory behaviour.
Similar results have been obtained in vivo in the rat (Kayama, Sumitomo &
Ogawa, 1986) and in the cat (Mulle et al. 1986). It has been suggested that these two
voltage-dependent responses are related to different functional states of the nucleus.
The present study provides new data about the ionic mechanisms underlying the
electrical properties which characterize either mode of firing.
The tonic firing pattern is characterized by Na+ (TTX-sensitive) fast action
potentials. Each action potential is followed by a short hyperpolarizing after-potential
(SAHP) which is mediated by a Ca2+-dependent K+ current. This current shows
similarities to the lc, a Ca2+-dependent K+ current described by Brown & Griffith

PROPERTIES OF RTN NEURONES IN VITRO
119
(1983) on hippocampal neurones, which is responsible for the spike repolarization
and transiently activated by Ca2+ influx during spike activation (Brown, Constanti
& Adams, 1982). Like Ic (Lancaster & Nicoll, 1987), the current underlying SAHP
in RTN neurones has been found to be: (a) K+ sensitive, (b) blocked by TEA and by
Cd2' and (c) reversed at -73 mV (de Curtis et al. 1988).
A second TEA-sensitive current is known to be responsible for the spike
repolarization, namely the delayed rectifier IK (Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952). The
contribution of IK to the spike repolarization could be evaluated by subtracting the
effects of Cd2+ (selectively affecting the Ca2+-dependent Ic) from those of TEA
(affecting both the Ca2+-dependent Ic and the IK) (Fig. 1). As the TEA effect on the
repolarizing phase of the action potential was proved to be substantially greater than
the Cd2+ effect, we concluded that in RTN neurones the IK significantly contributes
to the spike repolarization.
Another Ca2+-dependent K+ current, the IAHP, is considered to play an important
role in spike frequency accommodation on different types of neurones where it
underlies long-lasting AHPs (Alger & Nicoll, 1980). In our experiments, the longlasting SAHPs reported in thalamocortical neurones (Deschenes et al. 1984;
McCormick & Prince, 1988) were not observed at resting membrane potential in RTN
neurones, which accordingly exhibited a poor spike frequency accommodation.
Similar findings have been previously reported by Mulle et al. (1986) in their in vivo
study on cat RTN neurones.
The overall result of these data suggests that, in resting conditions, the RTN
neurones have strong spike repolarizing currents and that the mechanisms
responsible for repetitive firing control are inactive. The short refractory period
associated with the lack of accommodation and slow AHP enable the RTN neurones
to fire tonically at high frequency. GABAergic neurones, located in different
structures of the CNS, have recently been reported to show electrophysiological
properties similar to those described above for the RTN neurones, i.e. a fast, high
rate of firing with poor frequency adaptation (Schlag & Waszak, 197 1; Schwartzkroin
& Mathers, 1978; McCormick, Connors, Lighthall & Prince, 1985; Lacaille, Mueller,
Kunkel & Schwartzkroin, 1987; Nakanishi, Kita & Kitai, 1987).
The burst response of RTN neurones differs from that of the other thalamic
neurones (Jahnsen & Llinas, 1984a) in that it is followed by a deep afterhyperpolarization (BAHP). Unlike the AHP described in many CNS neurones, this
potential is not activated in a graded fashion and occurs as a transient all-or-none
potential. The BAHP was flattened at -85 mV. Its reversal potential was difficult
to detect, because of its dependence on the Ca2+ influx associated with LTS; when
the LTS is inactivated (below -90 mV and above -60 mV) no BAHP was obtained.
The BAHP is composed of (a) an early Cd2+- and TEA-sensitive part, probably
carried by an outward current which is the result of the summation of the Ca2+_
dependent Ic repeatedly activated during the repolarization of the fast action
potentials within the burst and (b) a late BAHP due to an outward Ca2+-dependent
K+ current, selectively suppressed by apamine, but not by 8-Br cyclic AMP.
Therefore, both the early and the late BAHPs are mediated by Ca2+-dependent K+
currents, which counteract the strong depolarization underlying the burst. The
BAHP plays an important role in the burst termination.

120

G. A VANZINI AND OTHERS

A further difference with respect to the relay thalamic neurones is given by the Na±
action potential, preceded by a membrane rectification, which leads the burst. This
spike is not dependent on the burst, being elicitable when the LTS is blocked by
Cd2+; according to Mulle et al. (1986), it can result from a persistent somatic or slowly
inactivating remote Na+ current. At membrane polarization levels which enable
burst firing, prolonged depolarizing current pulses evoked in RTN neurones
sustained, rhythmic sequences of burst-BAHP, which gradually faded. The burst
firing frequency varies among neurones, ranging between 6 and 8 Hz. The interburst
interval appeared to be directly related to the duration of the BAHP which was
never less than 100 ms.
Rhythmic oscillatory activities of 8-12 Hz have been previously reported in intact
cat RTN by Steriade & Deschenes (1984), Steriade et al. (1986, 1987) and Mulle et al.
(1986). More recently, McCormick & Prince (1988) observed rhythmic burst
discharges at a rate of 0-5-2 Hz in another thalamic nucleus, the paratenial, studied
in in vitro slices from guinea-pigs.
Our experiments suggest the presence of different currents responsible for bursting
sequences in RTN neurones: (a) inward, rapidly inactivating currents carried by
Na+ and Ca2+ ions, (b) slow inward regenerative currents and (c) Ca2+-dependent
outward currents carried by K+ ions. A basic role in the maintenance of burst
sequences is played by the intracellular Ca2+ influx caused by activation of both the
LTS and the fast Na+ spikes which form the burst. When this influx is abolished by
Cd2+ or TTX, respectively, the burst sequences disappear. The disappearance of
rhythmic activity during TTX perfusion could be a consequence of either the
abolition of Ca2+ influx occurring during Na+ spike or the blockage of a persistent
regenerative Na+ current (de Curtis et al. 1988).
Both the slow rectifying Na+ current and the Ca2+ current responsible for the LTS
operated during the depolarizing decaying phase of BAHP. Consistent with the
BAHP fading, they became progressively less pronounced and eventually failed to
activate a new burst, thereby ending the rhythmic sequence. The Ca2+ entry during
the burst activates two Ca2+-dependent currents: a fast K+ current (Ic) and a slow,
apamine-sensitive, 8-Br cyclic AMP-insensitive K+ current. The blockage of the
current Ic induced by TEA produces a slowing down of the early BAHP together
with an increase in its amplitude and enhancement of the oscillatory behaviour. It
was reported recently that TEA could enhance the TEA-resistant Ca2+-dependent
K+ currents, by increasing the Ca2+ influx due to the broadening of the spike
repolarization (Storm, 1987); it is also known that the TEA-resistant, apaminesensitive Ca2+-dependent K+ current is strongly dependent on the intracellular Ca2+
concentration (Blatz & Magleby, 1987).
We conclude that BAHP plays a crucial role in deactivating the next LTS in a
sequence, thus resulting in an oscillatory activity with a mechanism similar to that
recently described by Wilcox, Gutnick & Cristoph, (1988) on the lateral habenula
neurones studied in vitro. As in the RTN cells, in habenula the burst sequences
activated as a rebound response to hyperpolarizing current pulses are dependent on
the presence of an AHP which follows the burst. It is noteworthy that in guinea-pig
paratenial neurones, where McCormick & Prince (1988) found triphasic AHPs much
larger than in RTN, slower oscillatory activities were also found.

PROPERTIES OF RTN NEURONES IN VITRO

121

On the basis of their intracellular recordings from in vivo cat RTN, Mulle et al.
(1986) suggested that in addition to the K+-dependent hyperpolarization, GABAmediated hyperpolarizing IPSPs fulfill an important role in deinactivating LTS in
neighbouring neurones. We have found no evidence of any synaptic contribution to
the generation of the oscillatory activity in the in vitro rat RTN. In addition, local
application of GABA to RTN neurones has proved to depolarize rather than to
hyperpolarize the membrane (McCormick & Prince, 1986; Spreafico, de Curtis,
Frassoni & Avanzini, 1988) and to be associated with a marked decrease in
membrane resistance; the resulting shunt of the membrane was usually effective in
damping the burst-BAHP sequences.
In conclusion, the reported data are consistent with a double function of isolated
RTN neurones studied in vitro: (a) a relay-like behaviour, defined by the tonic firing
discharge modality and characterized by the ability to perform high frequency
responses in a condition of poor repetitive firing control and (b) a bursting discharge
behaviour, characterized by the ability to maintain rhythmic burst sequences at low
rates (6-8 Hz).
This work was partially supported by C.N.R. grant No. 86.00339.04 and by the Associazione
Paolo Zorzi per le Neuroscienze. We wish to thank Miss Marije de Jager for her assistance in the
preparation of the manuscript.
REFERENCES

ALGER, B. E. & NICOLL, R. A. (1980). Epileptiform burst after hyperpolarization: calciumdependent potassium potential in hippocampal CAl pyramidal cells. Science 210, 1122-1124.
AVANZINI, G., DE CURTIS, M. & SPREAFICO, R. (1987). Electrophysiological characterization of
single neurones of the nucleus reticularis thalami on rat slices. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts
3, 271.
BLATZ, A. L. & MAGLEBY, K. L. (1987). Calcium-activated potassium channels. Trends in
Neurosciences 10, 463-467.
BROWN, D. A., CONSTANTI, A. & ADAMS, P. R. (1982). Calcium-dependence of a component of a
transient outward current in bullfrog ganglion cells. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 8, 252.
BROWN, D. A. & GRIFFITH, W. H. (1983). Persistent slow inward current in voltage-clamped
hippocampal neurones of the guinea-pig. Journal of Physiology 337, 303-320.
DE BIASI, S., FRASSONI, C. & SPREAFICO, R. (1986). GABA immunoreactivity in the thalamic
reticular nucleus of the rat. A light and electron microscopical study. Brain Research 339,
143-147.
DE CURTIS, M., SPREAFICO, R., PANZICA, F. & AVANZINI, G. (1988). Firing modes of RTN neurons
recorded from thalamic slices. In Cellular Thalamic Mechanisms, Excerpta Medica International
Congress Series 765, ed. BENTIVOGLIO, M. & SPREAFICO, R., pp. 63-75. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
DESCHENES, M., PARADIS, M., Roy, J. P. & STERIADE, M. (1984). Electrophysiology of neurons of
lateral thalamic nuclei in cat: resting properties and burst discharges. Journal of Neurophysiology
51, 1196-1219.
HODGKIN, A. L. & HUXLEY, A. F. (1952). A quantitative description of membrane currents and its
application to conduction and excitation in nerve. Journal of Physiology 117, 500-544.
HOUSER, C. R., VAUGHN, J. E., BARBER, R. P. & ROBERTS, E. (1980). GABA neurons are the major
cell type of the nucleus reticularis thalami. Brain Research 200, 341-354.
JAHNSEN, H. & LLINAS, R. (1984a). Electrophysiological properties of guinea-pig thalamic
neurones: an in vitro study. Journal of Physiology 349, 205-226.
JAHNSEN, H. & LLINAiS, R. (1984b). Ionic basis for the electroresponsiveness and oscillatory
properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurones in vitro. Journal of Physiology 349, 227-247.
JONES, E. G. (1975). Some aspect of the organization of the thalamic reticular complex. Journal of
Comparative Neurology 162, 285-308.
KAYAMA, Y., SUMITOMO, I. & OGAWA, T. (1986). Does the ascending cholinergic projection inhibit

122

G. A VANZINI AND OTHERS

or excite neurons in the rat thalamic reticular nucleus? Journal of Neurophysiology 56,
1310-1320.
LACAILLE, J. C., MUELLER, A. L., KtTNKEL, D. D. & SCHWARTZKROIN, P. A. (1987). Local circuit
interactions between oriens-alveus interneurons and CA1 pyramidal cells in hippocampal slices:
electrophysiology and morphology. Journal of Neuroscience 7, 1979-1993.
LANCASTER, B. & NICOLL, R. A. (1987). Properties of two calcium-activated hyperpolarizations in
rat hippocampal neurones. Journal of Physiology 389, 187-203.
LLINAS, R. & YAROM, Y. (1981 a). Electrophysiology of mammalian inferior olivary neurones in
vitro: different types of voltage-dependent ionic conductances. Journal of Physiology 315,
549-567.
LLINAS, R. & YAROM, Y. (1981 b). Properties and distribution of ionic conductances generating
electroresponsiveness of mammalian inferior olivary neurones in vitro. Journal of Physiology 315,
569-584.
MCCORMIC, D. A., CONNORS, B. WV., LIGHTHALL, J. WV. & PRINCE, D. A. (1985). Comparative
electrophysiology of pyramidal and sparsely spiny stellate neurons in the neocortex. Journal of
Neurophysiology 54, 782-806.
MCCORMICK, D. A. & PRINCE, D. A. (1986). Acetylcholine induces burst firing in thalamic reticular
neurons by activating a potassium conductance. Nature 319, 402-405.
MCCORMIC, D. A. & PRINCE, D. A. (1988). Noradrenergic modulation of firing pattern in guinea pig
and cat thalamic neurons, in vitro. Journal of Neurophysiology 59, 978-996.
MULLE, C., MADARIAGA, A. & DESCHENES, M. (1986). Morphology and electrophysiological
properties of reticularis thalami neurons in cat: in vivo study of a thalamic pacemaker. Journal
of Neurosciences 6, 2134-2145.
NAKANISHI, H., KITA, H. & KITAI, S. T. (1987). Intracellular study of rat substantia nigra pars
reticulata neurons in an in vitro slice preparation: electrical membrane properties and response
characteristics to subthalamic stimulation. Brain Research 437, 45-55.
PENNEFATHER, P., LANCASTER, B., ADAMS, P. R. & NICOLL, R. A. (1985). Two distinct Cadependent K currents in bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cells. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the USA 82, 3040-3044.
SCHLAG, J. & WASZAK, M. (1971). Electrophysiological properties of units in the thalamic reticular
complex. Experimental Neurology 32, 79-97.
SCHWARTZKROIN, P. A. & MATHERS, L. H. (1978). Physiological and morphological identification
of a non-pyramidal hippocampal cell type. Brain Research 157, 1-10.
SPREAFICO, R., FRASSONI, C., BATTAGLIA, G. & SCHMECHEL, D. E. (1984). The intrinsic organization
of the nucleus reticularis thalami in the rat: a Golgi, HRP and immunocytochemical study.
Neuroscience Letters Supplement 18, S25.
SPREAFICO, F., DE CURTIS, M., FRASSONI, C. & AVANZINI G. (1988). Electrophysiological
characteristics of morphologically identified reticular thalamic neurons from rat slices.
Neuroscience 27, 629-638.
STERIADE, M. & DESCHENES, M. (1984). The thalamus as a neuronal oscillator. Brain Research
Review 8, 1-62.
STERIADE, M., DOMICH, L. & OAKSON. G. (1986). Reticularis thalami neurons revisited: activity
changes during shifts in state of vigilance. Journal of Neuroscience 6, 68-81.
STERIADE, M., DOMICH, L., OAKSON, G. & DESCHENES, M. (1987). The deafferented reticularis
thalami nucleus generates spindle rhythmicity. Journal of Neurophysiology 57, 260-273.
STORM, J. F. (1987). Action potential repolarization and fast after-hyperpolarization in rat
hippocampal pyramidal cells. Journal of Physiology 385, 733-759.
WILCOX, K. S., GUTNICK, M. J. & CHRISTOPH, G. R. (1988). Electrophysiological properties of
neurons in the lateral habenula nucleus: an in vitro study. Journal of Neurophysiology 59,
212-225.
YEN, C. T., CONLEY, M., HENDRY, S. H. C. & JONES, E. G. (1985). The morphology of
physiologically identified GABAergic neurons in the somatic sensory part of the thalamic
reticular nucleus in the cat. Journal of Neuroscience 5, 2254-2268.

