4398

Journal of Physiology (1996), 490.1, pp.129-147

Electrophysiological and morphological properties of
interneurones in the rat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus
in vitro
Stephen R. Williams, Jonathan P. Turner, Caroline M. Anderson
and Vincenzo Crunelli
Department of Physiology, University of Wales
Cardiff CFJ ISS, UK
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Cardiff, Museum Avenue,

Intracellular recordings were made from putative interneurones (n = 24) and thalamocortical
(TC) projection neurones (n = 45) in slice preparations of the rat dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus (dLGN) in order to compare the electrophysiological properties of these neuronal
types.
Intracellular injection of biocytin to electrophysiologically identified neurones (n = 34)
revealed the morphology of putative interneurones (n = 4) to be similar to class B and that
of TC neurones (n = 30) to be similar to class A Golgi-impregnated neurones.
Interneurones had resting membrane potentials (-52 mV) relatively positive to those of TC
neurones (-63 mV), shorter time constants (36-8 and 58-2 ms, respectively), but similar
steady-state input resistances (164 and 180 MQ, respectively). Steady-state voltage-current
relationships were nearly linear in interneurones, but highly non-linear in TC neurones.
The structure of action potential firing evoked at the break of hyperpolarizing voltage
transients was dependent upon neuronal type. Interneurones fired a single action potential
or a burst of action potentials with a maximum frequency of < 130 Hz, whilst TC neurones
fired a high frequency burst with a minimum frequency of >250 Hz. In addition, welldefined burst firing of action potentials in response to depolarizing voltage excursions, from
membrane potentials negative to -65 mV, could be evoked in TC neurones, but not in
interneurones.
The directly evoked action potentials of interneurones were characterized by an initial slow
pre-potential preceding the fast upstroke of the action potential. The amplitude and width
of interneurones' action potentials were smaller than those of TC neurones and the
amplitude and duration of the single action potential after-hyperpolarization were greater
in interneurones. Both interneurones and TC neurones fired action potentials repetitively in
response to suprathreshold voltage excursions, with interneurones demonstrating a greater
degree of spike-frequency adaptation. Following a train of action potentials, interneurones
and TC neurones generated a slow after-hyperpolarizing potential: in interneurones but not
TC neurones this potential was followed by a slow depolarizing potential.
An intrinsic, subthreshold membrane potential oscillatory activity with a mean frequency
of -8 Hz was observed in interneurones.
Electrical stimulation of the optic tract evoked in interneurones apparently pure EPSPs,
pure IPSPs or a mixture of EPSPs and IPSPs. EPSPs were found to be biphasic and
mediated by the activation of non-N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and NMDA excitatory
amino acid receptors. IPSPs and the response to the iontophoretic application of GABA
were found to reverse between -65 and -70 mV. The application of GABAB receptor
agonists failed to affect the membrane properties of six of seven interneurones tested. In
addition spontaneous EPSPs and IPSPs were recorded in interneurones.
These results demonstrate that the electrophysiological properties of putative interneurones
are distinct from those of TC neurones of the rat dLGN. The implications of these findings
for the control of visual responsiveness of TC neurones are discussed.

129

S. R. Williams and others

130
The receptive field properties
projection neurones of the dorsal
(dLGN) and the transfer ratio

of thalamocortical

lateral geniculate
of retinal

(TC)

nucleus

input

to

TC

output is known to be modulated by inhibitory
processes (Sillito & Kemp, 1983; Berardi & Morrone, 1984;
Heggelund & Hartveit, 1990; Norton & Godwin, 1992). The
basis of such inhibition is thought to be the generation of

neurone

GABA-mediated inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs)
evoked in a feed-forward manner through the activation
dLGN interneurones (Lindstrom, 1982; Crunelli,
Jassik-Gerschenfeld, Leresche & Pirchio 1988;

of

Haby,

Soltesz,

Lightowler, Leresche & Crunelli, 1989) and in a feed-back
manner through peri-geniculate nucleus (PGN) neurones
(Hale, Sefton, Baur & Cottee, 1982; Lindstrom,
driven by the output of TC neurones (Ahlsen & Lindstrom,
1982). However, the precise contribution of these sources
the inhibition of TC neurones is poorly understood (but
Jones & Sillito (1994) for the involvement of the PGN).
1982),

to

see

The direct retinal input to interneurones

(Hamos,

Van Horn,

Raczkowski, Uhlrich & Sherman, 1985; Humphrey
Weller, 1988), Ihe monosynaptic axonal output connections
of interneurones to sites proximal to the soma
neurones (Montero, 1987) and the possible involvement
dendro-dendritic inhibition provided by interneurones
(Hamos et al. 1985) suggest that interneurones are ideally
placed for the modulation of geniculo-cortical information
transfer. Indeed in the rat and cat dLGN, IPSPs evoked

&

of

TC

of

by

interneurones have been shown to inhibit the generation
action potentials in TC neurones (Crunelli et at.
Soltesz et al. 1989). Although data are available concerning
the membrane properties of cat dLGN interneurones
(McCormick & Pape, 1988) and dissociated rat interneurones
(Pape, Budd, Mager & Kisvardy, 1994), little is
about the mode and pattern of action potential generation,
the nature of the excitatory input to, or the presence
nature of the inhibition of, these neurones. These data
critically important in an examination of the

of

1988;

known

and
are

role

interneurones in the modulation
neurone output.

Using an in vitro preparation
that interneurones may be

of the rat

pattern

dLGN,

intracellular

properties, firing

of

of

TC

we report

electrophysiologically

anatomically identified following

biocytin. The membrane

of the

and

injection

pattern

of

and

synaptic responsiveness of interneurones revealed by
experiments suggest a new level of physiological complexity
within the circuitry of the dLGN. Preliminary reports
some of the results presented here have been
(Williams, Turner & Crunelli, 1994; Williams, Anderson
Crunelli, 1995a).

these

of

published
&

METHODS
Slicing and recording

procedures

The preparation and maintenance
were

similar

to

those

Leresche & Pirchio,

of brain slices

described

1987).

Male

previously

Wistar rats

of the

rat

dLGN

(Crunelli,
(150-200 g)

Kelly,
were

J Physiol. 490.1

decapitated and a block of tissue containing the dLGN was
separated from the rest of the brain by two cuts made parallel to
the plane of the optic tract. The tissue block was stuck to the stage
of a Vibroslice (Campden Instruments), bathed in a continuously
aerated (95% 02, 5% C02) cold (< 1 °C) medium containing (mM):
NaCl, 134; NaHCO3, 16; KCI, 5; KH2PO4, 1P25; MgSO4, 5; CaCl2,
2; and glucose, 10; and were sliced at a thickness of 400-500 tm.
The slices were transferred to a storage bath, submerged in the
same medium at room temperature, where they remained viable
for transfer to the recording chamber. A single brain slice was then
transferred to the recording chamber of an interface-type bath,
and perfused with the same medium, warmed to a temperature of
35 + 1
for at least 30 min. Thirty minutes before recording
commenced the perfusion medium was replaced with one of
similar composition, but containing 2 mm KCl and 1 mm MgSO4.
Intracellular sharp electrode recordings were made with glass
microelecetrodes (GC 120F, Clark Electromedical Instruments,
Pangbourne, Reading, UK) filled with 1 M potassium acetate or
2% biocytin dissolved in 1 M potassium acetate (resistance,
80-120 M2). Potentials were recorded with an Axoclamp-2A
amplifier (Axon Instruments), configured in bridge-balance mode,
and stored on a Biologic DAT recorder (Intracel, Royston, Herts,
UK). Data were subsequently filtered (DC to 1-30 kHz) and
digitally sampled. Results were analysed with a microcomputer
running pCLAMP software (Axon Instruments). Postsynaptic
potentials were evoked with the use of a bipolar tungsten electrode
placed amongst, and parallel to, the fibres of the optic tract. Using
low frequency (0 05-0 1 Hz) electrical stimulation (20-50 ,us,
1-20 V) excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) and/or IPSPs
were generated in approximately 50% of TC neurones tested.
Numerical results are expressed in the text as means +S.E.M. and
statistical significance was tested (a =5%) using Student's t test.
An independently mounted, multibarrelled micropipette (4-6 ,um
tip diameter) was used to eject iontophoretically GABA (1M,
pH 5), while a barrel containing 1M NaCl was used for automatic
current balancing. Retaining current was applied to the GABAcontaining barrel when necessary. All other drugs were dissolved
in and applied via the perfusion medium. Drugs were obtained
from the following sources: 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione
(CNQX) and DL-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (DL-AP5),
Tocris Cookson, Bristol, UK; GABA, (±)-baclofen and y-hydroxybutyric acid, Sigma; 1-(4-amino-phenyl)-4-methyl-7,8-methylenedioxy-5H-2,3-benzodiazepine (GYKI 52466) was kindly donated
by Dr Istvan Tarnawa, Institute for Drug Research, Budapest,
Hungary.
Dye injection and anatomical procedures
Intracellular dye-filling of neurones with biocytin was
accomplished without the need of an ejection protocol, since
preliminary experiments had shown that recordings of duration
greater than 10 min allowed the subsequent recovery of well-filled
neurones. When using biocytin-filled electrodes, we typically
recorded from a maximum of three neurones in each slice and the
approximate location of neurones was marked on drawings of
brain slices. At the end of recording, the brain slice was
maintained for at least1 h, before transfer to a fixative solution
(4% paraformaldehyde in 0-1M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS),
pH 7 4). Slices were maintained in the fixative for 8-14 h and then
transferred to 0-1M PBS, embedded in agar and re-sectioned at
50/um. To quench background peroxidase activity and
permeabilize the tissue, sections were incubated with 0 3% H202
in PBS with 0 4% Triton X-100 (Sigma) for 30 min, rinsed to
clear the H202 and then incubated for a further 2 h with an

°C,

Interneurones of the dLGN

J Physiol. 490.1

avidin-biotin-horseradish peroxidase complex (Elite ABC kit,
Vector Labs, Peterborough, UK) in 0 4% Triton X-100 PBS. This
step was followed by a 5-10 min wash in 1% cobalt chloride
(BDH, Lutterworth, UK) in 0-02 M Tris buffer (Sigma), in order to
intensify the subsequent reaction and produce a blue/black
product. To visualize the filled neurones, sections were reacted
with 0-1 M diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (Sigma) in 0-1 M
Tris buffer (pH 7f2 at 25 °C) and 0'02% H202. Sections were then
rinsed in PBS and arranged on slides using a gelatine mounting
solution. After air-drying the mounted sections were dehydrated
in 10% incremental concentrations of alcohol (50-100%), defatted
in xylene and mounted in DPX (Aldrich, Gillingham, UK).
The morphology of neurones was examined using a light
microscope and measurements of somal and dendritic area were
made from camera lucida reconstructions made at x 1300 and
x 200, respectively. Somal and dendritic areas were calculated
according to the methods of Spreafico, Schmechel & Rustioni
(1983) where the area (A) is calculated from the formula A = 7rab,
where a and b are the minimum and maximum somal/dendritic
radii. This method assumes the somal/dendritic fields to be
elliptical when a and b are different or more circular as a
approaches b. Final, illustrated camera lucida reconstructions were
made at a magnification of x 625 or x 800. Measurements were not
corrected for tissue shrinkage.

RESULTS
Previous morphological evidence has indicated that
neurones of the rat dLGN may be divided into two groups
termed class A and B (Grossman, Liberman & Webster,
1973; Gabbot, Somogyi, Stewart & Hamori, 1986). Class B
neurones are known to be both GABA positive and express
glutamic acid decarboxylase immunoreactivity and so have
been suggested to be local circuit inhibitory interneurones
(Ohara, Liberman, Hunt & Wu, 1983; Gabbot et al. 1986),
whilst class A neurones are suggested to be TC neurones
(Grossman et al. 1973; Ohara et al. 1983; Gabbot et al.
1986). During the course of our evolving study of the
electrophysiological properties of rat dLGN neurones we
have recorded two populations of neurones, with distinct
electrophysiological properties. A previous study utilizing
combined electrophysiological and morphological analysis
(Crunelli et al. 1987) has described the properties of rat
dLGN neurones that were morphologically similar to class A
neurones and exhibited electrophysiological properties
similar to morphologically identified TC neurones from the
thalamus of other species (Jahnsen & Llina's, 1984;
McCormick & Pape, 1988). Isolated recordings of presumed
interneurones of the rat dLGN (Leresche, Lightowler,
Soltesz, Jassik-Gershenfeld & Crunelli, 1991) have indicated
that their membrane properties are similar to those of
morphologically identified interneurones of the cat dLGN
(McCormick & Pape, 1988). We utilized the classification
system of McCormick & Pape (1988) to identify interneurones, and from our observations have extended it to
produce a set of criteria that allowed the differentiation
between the electrophysiological properties of interneurones
and TC neurones. The distinguishing properties were: (i) the
shape of steady-state voltage-current relationships, (ii) the

131

shape of single action potentials and their fast after-hyperpolarizing potentials, (iii) the pattern of tonic action
potential firing, (iv) the presence of a post-train slow afterdepolarizing potential, (v) the structure and frequency of
action potential firing evoked at the break of hyperpolarizing voltage excursions and (vi) the presence of
-8 Hz subthreshold oscillatory activity. These criteria
together with correlated morphological analysis have
allowed us to identify unambiguously interneurones and
TC neurones. The three neurones that appeared to have
electrophysiological properties transitional between these
two groups were excluded from our analysis. Our results,
therefore, describe the comparative electrophysiological and
morphological properties of interneurones and TC
neurones; their distinct properties are described below and
summarized in Fig. 1.
The experiments described in this paper are based on
recordings made from sixty-nine neurones: of these twentyfour were physiologically classified as putative interneurones
and forty-five as putative TC neurones. These figures do not
faithfully reflect the ratio of TC neurone to interneurone
recorded, as putative interneurones were collected during
our evolving studies of rat dLGN neurones recorded under
identical conditions to those reported here. The results
obtained from the other TC neurones of this data base have
appeared elsewhere (Turner, Leresche, Guyon, Soltesz &
Crunelli, 1994; Williams, Turner & Crunelli, 1995). Taken
together, the percentage of putative interneurones of the
total number of rat dLGN neurones reported is 16%.

Morphological properties
The intracellular injection of biocytin allowed the
examination of neuronal morphology, in thirty-four wellfilled of forty injected neurones. Of these, four were
classified as putative interneurones and thirty as presumed
TC neurones by their morphological properties (Grossman,
Liberman & Webster, 1973). Occasionally putative interneurones and TC neurones were recorded from the same
slice preparation (Fig. 1), allowing a direct comparison
between neurones of the same animal. Putative interneurones had small fusiform somata with a mean area of
1702 + 15-7 #sm2 (n = 4). Each neurone had two principle
dendrites originating from opposite poles of the soma, so
that the neurones had a bipolar shape that was oriented in
the dorso-ventral plane (Figs 1 and 2). In one case, two
additional lower calibre primary dendrites emerged from
the cell body, although the low calibre of these dendrites did
not detract from the predominant bipolar appearance of the
neurone. Primary dendrites branched dichotomously; these
and higher order dendrites possessed short formations that
terminated in grape-like structures (Figs 1 and 2). Primary
and daughter dendritic branches gave rise to fine calibre,
varicose branches that bifurcated and often ended in
beaded formations (Figs 1 and 2). The total dendritic field
area was 0-129 + 0-027 mm2; however, since the secondary
dendrites of an interneurone (Fig. 2) exited from the tissue

S. R. WillioaMts and others

132

sections, this parameter underestimates the total
dendritic field area. We were not able to identify
unambiguously the axons of putative interneurones: since
some dendrites exhibited an axon-like appearance, it may
be possible that such neurites represent the axonal
projections of interneurones. Although one injection of
biocytin to a presumed interneurone failed to reveal its full
morphology, we were able to visualize a primary dendritic
tree that was similar to those of the other interneurones
(not illustrated).
Presumed TC neurones were found to have more spherical
somata (Figs 1 and 2), with an average area of
270-9 + 12-0 ,um2 (n = 30), which was significantly greater
than that of putative interneurones (P < 0 05, T= 2 97).
A variable number of primary dendrites (3 to 10;
mean = 6 0), which typically branched dichotomously,
emerged from somata and gave rise to daughter dendrites
that further branched to form 2nd to 7th order terminal
dendrites (mean = 5, n = 88). The calibre of terminal
dendrites did not appreciably differ from those of

J Physiol. 490.1

secondary dendrites. In all cases dendrites were radially
oriented, with a mean dendritic area of 0 101 + 0 07 mm2
(n = 30). The primary dendrites of presumed TC neurones
did not carry any specializations, while the secondary and
higher order branches possessed stud-like appendages or
spines (Figs 1 and 2). Presumed axons, identified by their
low calibre and branchless appearance, were filled in -50 %
of TC neurones (Figs 1 and 2). The course of the axons
could be traced for some neurones; the axons were found to
project towards the dorso-medial quadrant of the brain
slice, where the nucleus reticularis thalami (NRT) would be
located if included in the brain slice. We were not able to
identify axonal branching or terminal arborization of axons
within the dLGN.
The electrophysiological properties of the neurones that
were not filled with biocytin were found to be similar to
those of filled interneurones or TC neurones, indicating
that these electrophysiological features represent an
unequivocal method for the identification of interneurones
and TC neurones. We have, therefore, omitted the prefix

Class A

I 20 mV

-60 mV
I 0-4 nA

-1

las~
~
~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~ls

1Class B

-54 mV

200 ms

t1
Figure 1. Electrophysiological and morphological features of an interneurone and two TC
neurones recorded from the same slice preparation
Intracellular voltage records from a class A TC neurone demonstrates the resting potential, the
rectification properties and the high frequency rebound firing driven by a low threshold Ca2+ potential,
typical of this class of neurone. In comparison, the recording of a class B interneurone indicates the
relatively positive resting potential, the minimal rectification and the weak rebound firing driven by a
small amplitude, transient depolarizing potential. Traces beneath voltage records represent current
injection. The morphology of these neurones is shown in camera lucida reconstructions (x 625). The small
oblique arrow indicates the point where the axonal projection turns towards the NRT. In voltage records
action potential amplitude has been truncated for clarity.

B

J Physiol.490.1

133

Interneurones cgf the dLGN

presumed or putative from a description of
throughout the remaining sections of the paper.

neurones exhibited
prominent rectification in both the depolarized and hyperpolarized direction. However, in 21% of interneurones a
depolarizing sag was apparent during the course of large
amplitude hyperpolarizing (>25 mV) voltage excursions;
the degree of this time-dependent rectification was, in all
cases, not as great as that for TC neurones (Fig. 2A and C).
The construction of voltage-current relationships in interneurones at holding potentials separated by 10 mV,
achieved by tonic injection of current through the
recording electrode, indicated the presence of steady
rectification. These procedures yielded a decrease in input
resistance of 33 + 10 MQ per 10 mV negative shift in the
holding potential (n = 3). The time constant of
interneurones (36-8 + 3-8 ms, n = 24), calculated by the
fitting of a mono-exponential function to small (< 10 mV)

current relationships, whilst those of TC

neurones

Membrane properties
The resting potential of interneurones (-52 + 1 mV,
n = 24) was found to be significantly (P < 0 05, T = 9 09)
more positive than that of TC neurones (-63 + 1 mV,
n = 30). Of our sample, 13% of interneurones were found
to fire action potentials spontaneously, when no current
was injected through the recording electrode. The input
resistance of interneurones (164 + 15 MQ, n = 13),
calculated by taking the maximal slope of steady-state
voltage-current relationships, was not significantly
different (P > 0 05, T = 0 74) from that of TC neurones
(180 + 15 MQ, n = 19). The shape of these relationships
was, however, found to differ between the two groups (Fig.
2): interneurones demonstrated relatively linear voltageA

B

Interneurone

V (mV) r -40
I

. _

~~~~~2 mV
.~~~0

(n A)

-0.2

0.1

.

-01

_ms

-80

~~~~
~~50,um

i

.*

>

--100

D

C
neurone

TO

V (mV) --40

L.e..@
S.'s'

I (nA)

-0 4

-022

0.6 nA

02

:1
--80

.*

o.

400

ms

--100

Figure 2. Voltage-current relationships of

a

50 um

morphologically identified interneurone and TC

neurone

Families of voltage and current records (single traces) used for the construction of voltage-current
relationships illustrated in the centre of the figure; the holding potential was set to -60 mV in both
neurones by the tonic passage of current through the recording electrode. The shape of these relationships,
measured at steady state for the interneurone (A) and the TC neurone (C) are clearly different, with the
TC neurone exhibiting prominant rectification in the depolarized and hyperpolarized direction. The
morphology of these neurones is shown in the camera lucida reconstructions (x 800) (B and D). The small
oblique arrow in D indicates the axon of the TC neurone. The amplitude of action potentials has been
truncated for clarity.

134

J Phy8iol. 490.1

S. R. Williams and others

hyperpolarizing voltage excursions, was found to be
significantly (P < 0 05, T = 2 59) shorter than that of TC
neurones (58'2 + 6-9 ms, n = 30).

Single action potential properties
The properties of action potentials of interneurones and
TC neurones were found to be different. Action potentials
were evoked by the passage of positive current through
the recording electrode for between 0-2 and 1-5 s; in each
neurone action potentials of the greatest and smallest
amplitude were measured. The amplitude of action
potentials generated by TC neurones (60-5 + 1-3 mV,
n = 30), when measured from firing threshold, was found
to be significantly (P < 0 05, T = 3 296) greater than
that of interneurones (53-6 + 1P7 mV, n = 30) (Fig. 3A).
The duration of action potentials of TC neurones
(0 54 + 0-02 ms, n = 30) was significantly (P < 0 05,
T = 2 356) broader than those of interneurones
(0-48 + 0-02, n = 30) when measured at half-height, but
not when measured at their base (1P0 + 0 03, n = 30, and
0 93 + 0 04, n= 30, respectively; P> 0 05, T=1P627).
The shape of the rising phase of the action potentials and

A

Interneurone

the fast after-hyperpolarizing potential (fAHP) differed
between the two groups. The fast rising phase of action
potentials generated by interneurones was preceded by a
slow ramp pre-potential (Fig. 3B) that was not present in
TC neurones. Single action potentials were followed by a
fAHP; the amplitude (14-95 + 0 57 mV, n = 15) and
duration (73-83 + 9-33 ms, n = 14) of these potentials in
interneurones were significantly greater (P < 0 05,
T= 6-231, and P< 0 05, T= 3 379, respectively) than
those of TC neurones (10-53 + 0X42 mV, n = 15 and
40X27 + 3 4 ms, n = 14, respectively; Fig. 3A and B).
Repetitive firing properties
The action potential firing pattern of interneurones and TC
neurones were found to be voltage dependent (Fig. 4A and
B). In response to positive current steps imposed from
holding potentials positive to -60 mV, both groups of
neurones demonstrated a tonic firing pattern (Figs 4 and 5).
Analysis of the structure of the firing pattern of
interneurones revealed the presence of a slow and
pronounced spike-frequency adaptation (Fig. 5A), while
the spike-frequency adaptation of TC neurones (Fig. 5B)
Overlay

TC neurone

1-5 ms

B

Interneurone

TC neurone

I 20 mV

20 ms

Figure 3. The shape, amplitude and after-hyperpolarization of single action potentials of
interneurones are different from those of TC neurones
A, the amplitude and width of interneuronal action potential were found to be smaller than those of TC
neurones. Action potential amplitude was measured from firing threshold and width at half-height. B, the
amplitude and duration of interneuronal after-hyperpolarizing potentials were greater than those of TC
neurones. The rising phase of interneuronal action potentials was characterized by a slow pre-potential
(B), which is shown at a faster time base in A. Note that the records in A and B are drawn from different
neurones.

Interneurones of the dLGN

J Physiol. 490.1

occurred more rapidly, as indicated by plots of the
instantaneous firing frequency against injected current
(Fig. 5A and B). The kinetics of spike-frequency adaptation
estimated from these relationships indicates that TC
neurones have reached a steady state at the 5th interspike
interval (ISI), whilst the firing frequency of interneurones
is still adapting. As a percentage, the reduction in the
firing frequency between the 1st and 5th ISI was 41 % for
TC neurones (n = 5) compared with 21 % for interneurones
(n = 5). The instantaneous firing frequency of interneurones and TC neurones at the 1st, 5th and 30th ISIs
was found to be linearly related to the amplitude of the
injected current (Fig. 5); at the 1st ISI, TC neurones
responded at a frequency of 53-9 + 12-2 Hz per 0 1 nA
(n = 5), whilst interneurones fired with a frequency of
42-1 + 8-4 Hz per 0 1 nA (n = 5). A considerable degree of
variation was found in the firing frequency of TC neurones
when measured at the first ISI (compare upper and lower
graphs in Fig. 5B), a result that reflects a variation in the
degree of rectification in the depolarized direction observed
between TO neurones (not illustrated).
A

135

The firing patterns of interneurones and TC neurones were
transformed when evoked from more negative holding
potentials. The degree of spike-frequency adaptation of
interneurones was found to be enhanced when action
potentials were evoked from increasingly negative holding
potentials (Fig. 4A). In TC neurones positive current steps
imposed from holding potentials negative to -65 mV
evoked a clear and isolated burst discharge that was
imposed upon a transient depolarizing potential (Fig. 4B).
Such transient depolarizing potentials have been described
for TC neurones as low threshold Ca2+ potentials (Deschenes,
Paradis, Roy & Steriade, 1984; Jahnsen & Llinas, 1984;
Crunelli et al. 1987; Crunelli, Lightowler & Pollard, 1989).
It is important to note that a well-defined burst of action
potentials was not generated by interneurones in response
to positive voltage excursions. The increased degree of
spike-frequency adaptation when action potentials were
evoked from holding potentials negative to -60 mV in
interneurones suggests that a transient depolarizing
potential evoked close to firing threshold may augment the
firing frequency over the first few action potentials of a

Interneurone

-50 mV

-70 mV
-80 mV

B

TC neurone

-50 mV
-70 mV

-85 mV
-

.0-4 nA

400 ms

Figure 4. The pattern of action potential output is voltage dependent in TO neurones and
interneurones
The action potential output evoked by injection of steps of positive current from holding potentials
positive to -60 mV indicates that both neurones have the ability to generate action potentials repetitively.
From potentials more negative than -65 mV, TC neurones (B), but not interneurones (A) were found to
generate a burst discharge of action potentials that were isolated from any subsequent tonic firing. The
degree of spike-frequency adaptation throughout the train of action potentials in interneurones was,
however, found to be increased at more negative holding potentials (A). Note in the middle trace A the
short delay to action potential firing. The amplitude of action potentials has been truncated for clarity.

J Physiol. 490.1

S. R. Williams and others

136

train (Fig. 4B). These data, however, clearly illustrate
that when action potentials are evoked from holding
potentials positive to -60 mV, interneurones, but not TC
neurones, exhibit a slow and pronounced spike-frequency
adaptation.
A

80

Following a train of action potentials a slow after-hyperpolarizing potential (sAHP) was observed in both
interneurones and TC neurones (Fig. 6). The amplitude of
these potentials was found to be related to the number of
action potentials generated during the train (Fig. 6). In

Interneurone

-

A,

60 i

0 22 nA

I
A

C.)
a)a, 40

-

AZ
A'

tA

A~ "

i'

° *

LL

&

0 22 nA

00 13

20 -

0U

VV1

0-18

00

0

Figure 5. The patterns of spikefrequency adaptation are different
between interneurones and TC

A

A

Lr

W

005
10

20

30

40

50

i

v

013

Event (ISI)
100 ISI

1

Rn -

ISI 5

I

u 60a.)
cr 40a)

009

"lb/

b/

/I

///l'K

ISI 30

LL

20
0 .0 5

0-

0

01

03

02

Current (nA)

B

TC neurone
200 -

ISI 1
160 -

0 36 nA

I
>1

20-4

ISI 5

C)
a)

cr 80-

ISI 30

a,

LL

40 o

028

*

0-1

200

02

03

04

-

0 20

ISI

1

160
>120

r9/O. ()

015

cr80

irYfr

40 -.
20 mV

30
ISI
0
40
1

300 ms
0*10

0.1

0-3
Current (nA)
02

04

-

neurones

A, the pattern of spike-frequency
adaptation of a representative
interneurone is shown from the
voltage traces and the instantaneous
frequency event graph; note the slow
and pronounced adaptation pattern.
The lower graph illustrates the linear
relationship between the injected
current and the instantaneous firing
frequency measured at the 1st, 5th
and 30th interspike interval (ISI). The
current-discharge relationship was
constructed from a holding potential
of -54 mV. B, a representative TC
neurone shows a pattern typified by
fast spike-frequency adaptation over
the first few action potentials of the
train. The relationship between
injected current and instantaneous
frequency measured at thelst, 5th
and 30th ISI was found to be linear.
Note that the upper graph is a
representation of the voltage-traces
illustrated; holding potential,
-55 mV. The lower graph constructed
from another TC neurone illustrates,
by comparison, a much steeper
relationship between injected current
and instantaneous firing frequency,
measured at the 1st ISI; holding
potential, -57 mV. For each currentdischarge relationship data were fitted
by 1st order regression analysis. The
values of injected current are
illustrated at the side of the voltage
traces. The amplitude of action
potentials in A and B has been
truncated for clarity.

Interneurones of the dLGN

J Physiol. 490.-1

interneurones, but not in TC neurones, the time course of
the sAHP was truncated and the potential replaced by a
slow after-depolarizing potential (sADP) that lasted for up
to 15 s following intense firing (Fig. 6A b). At the
maximum amplitude of the sADP the firing of action
potentials (not illustrated) or subthreshold oscillations of
the membrane potential were consistently observed (Fig.
6Aa and A b). In common with the sAHP, the sADP
appeared to be related to the number of action potentials
generated in the preceding train (Fig. 6A). The relative
magnitude of the sAHP and sADP was found to vary
between interneurones, but in each interneurone examined
both potentials were observed. A similar sADP was not

137

observed in TC neurones even following intense action
potential firing and so the sADP was considered to be one
of the defining electrophysiological features of rat dLGN
interneurones.
Burst firing
In each TC neurone examined burst firing was evoked at
the break of hyperpolarizing voltage transients. During the
construction of voltage-current relationships we measured
the instantaneous firing frequency of the burst, at the first
ISI, and found it to be linearly related to the amplitude of
the preceding voltage deviation, measured at steady state
(r = 0-585, P < 0 05; Fig. 7B and C). In each TC neurone

A a
Interneurone

015 nA

07 s
b

20 mV

030 nA

;/!

B

1.2 s

TC neurone

120s
e4

................

015 nA

022 nA
07 s

Figure 6. Interneurones but not TC neurones express a post-train slow after-depolarization
A a, following a train of action potentials interneurones were found to generate a slow after-hyperpolarization, the amplitude of which was related to the number of action potentials of the train. This
potential was followed by a slow after-depolarization, which increased in amplitude and duration (A b)
with the increasing number of action potentials of the train. B, a representative TC neurone exhibits only
a post-train slow after-hyperpolarization, which in common with that of interneurones was related to the
number of action potentials of the train. No evidence of a slow after-depolarization was detected. The
amplitude of positive current steps is marked below or at the side of the voltage records. The membrane
potential at which these activities were evoked was -54 mV for the interneurone and -56 mV for the TC
neurone. The amplitude of action potentials has been truncated for clarity.

138

S. R. Williams and others

such activity had a frequency greater than 250 Hz, with a
mean frequency of 401 + 6 Hz. In contrast, the burst firing
of interneurones, quantified using the same protocol, was
found to be characterized by a lower frequency of action
potential output, with a maximal frequency of less than
130 Hz and a mean frequency of 40 + 5 Hz (Fig. 7A and
C). In common with TC neurones the frequency of rebound
firing of interneurones was related in a linear manner to
the magnitude of the preceding voltage deviation (r = 0 39,
P < 0 05) (Fig. 7C). In interneurones rebound firing was
often characterized by the firing of a single action potential
and occasionally it was possible to observe in isolation a
transient depolarizing potential that resembled the low
threshold Ca2P potential of TC neurones (Fig. 7A and B).
The voltage range over which rebound firing could be
evoked at the break of hyperpolarizing voltage excursions

A

J Physiol. 490.1

was found to be different between groups. Rebound firing
could be evoked in interneurones when the holding potential
was set at or more positive to -60 mV (Fig. 2), whilst in TC
neurones rebound firing could be evoked from membrane
potentials more positive than -65 mV (Figs 3 and 5).
Subthreshold oscillation
Membrane potential oscillations were observed in interneurones (Fig. 8). Oscillatory activity was apparent in each
interneurone examined, and was expressed over a voltage
range positive to -55 mV. The activity had clear
periodicity as demonstrated by the autocorrelation analysis
of 1 s long segments of voltage traces (Fig. 8, insets). We
found the mean frequency of this oscillation for five
neurones to be 7-7 + 0 5 Hz (measured at -44 mV). When
the membrane potential of interneurones was depolarized
to firing threshold, interneurones, but not TC neurones,

Interneurone

-50 mv

B

Figure 7. The frequency and structure of rebound burst
firing is different between interneurones and TC neurones
At the break of hyperpolarizing voltage deviations, both
interneurones and TC neurones generated rebound burst firing.
A, representative recording of an interneurone demonstrates
that the burst firing is driven by a transient depolarizing
potential, which gives rise to one or two action potentials.
B, in comparison the rebound firing of a TC neurone was more
powerful: a low threshold Ca2+ potential led to the firing of
between 3 and 5 action potentials, which are shown as insets at
a faster time base. C, using the results from a number of such
experiments, the frequency of rebound firing (measured as the
instantaneous frequency of the first interspike interval) has
been plotted against the amplitude of the preceding voltage
deviations, measured at steady state for TC neurones (0) and
interneurones (0); these measures were found to be linearly
related. The data have been fitted by first order regression
(continuous line) and the dashed lines indicate the 95%
confidence limits. The amplitude of action potentials has been
truncated for clarity.

TC neurone

-60 mV200 m

500-

C

0 0

400 N

I. 300_

:.:4
*

TC ne urones

0

C.)
C
0)

2 200-

Interneurones

IL
0o

100

0

000~~
_-

10

,

-0

p

O00O

___0
____

o

O O

0

30
40
Voltage deviation (mV)
20

50

J Physiol. 490.1

Interneurones of the dLGN

showed an initial period of tonic firing followed by
sequences of clustered action potentials intermixed with
rhythmic membrane potential oscillations (Fig. 8). This
activity profile allowed us to investigate the voltage
dependence of the oscillatory activity of interneurones, and
indicated that the amplitude and frequency of oscillatory
activity, in all cases, increased upon membrane potential
depolarization (Fig. 8). The intrinsic nature of oscillatory
activity was demonstrated by its resistance to the coapplication of the excitatory amino acid (EAA) receptor
antagonists GYKI 52466 (100 ,CM) or CNQX (10 /uM) and
DL-AP5 (100 ISM) (Turner, Leresche, Guyon, Soltesz &
Crunelli, 1994). Indeed application of these antagonists
increased the periodicity of the oscillation (not illustrated),

139

presumably by removing contaminating activity due to
EPSPs and IPSPs that introduced irregularity in the
oscillation (see Fig. 11).

Synaptic potentials
EPSPs and IPSPs were evoked in interneurones (Figs 9
and 10) and TC neurones (not illustrated) by electrical
stimulation of the optic tract. The nature of the
postsynaptic potentials evoked in interneurones was found
to be variable; in three of six interneurones apparently
pure EPSPs were evoked (Fig. 9). Such potentials had a fast
rising phase with a decay that could not be fitted by a
mono-exponential function indicating the presence of a
slow smaller amplitude component, when EPSPs were
evoked from holding potentials positive to -65 mV (Fig. 9).

400 ms
-36 mV

0-30 nA

-38 mV

0-15 nA

Figure 8. Interneurones exhibit subthreshold
oscillatory activity
Interneurones generated subthreshold oscillations within a
frequency range of -8 Hz. The periodicity of this activity
is illustrated by the autocorrelation functions (insets above
the upper four voltage traces) for 1 s long segments of the
voltage trace obtained at different holding potentials. Note
that the degree of periodicity increases upon membrane
potential depolarization. In the lower two voltage records
the hyperpolarizing voltage deviations are generated by
the delivery of 0 1 nA square current pulses. Note that
near firing threshold a single action potential imposed on a
transient depolarizing potential is evoked at the break of
hyperpolarizing voltage excursions. The holding potential
is shown at the left and magnitude of injected current at
the right of voltage traces. The amplitude of action
potentials has been truncated for clarity.

-41 mV

a/
*05 nA

-43 mViwAA,L))L A

,A\/UA

-46 mV

0.0 nA

k-W

*0-07 nA
m

500 ims

-53 mV

-0-14 nA

J Physiol.490.1

S. R. Williams and others

140

When evoked from membrane potentials negative to
-65 mV, however, the contribution of the slow component
of the EPSPs was found to be reduced (Fig. 9); indeed, in
many cases, the decay phase of the fast EPSP component
could be well fitted by a mono-exponential function. In
each interneurone examined, a single action potential was
imposed upon the fast component of the EPSPs when the
peak amplitude reached firing threshold (Fig. 9). In
contrast, the stimulus-evoked action potential output of TC
neurones was more complex; at holding potentials negative
to -65 mV EPSPs drove the burst firing of action
potentials via the activation of low threshold Ca2+
potentials (Deschenes et al. 1984; Jahnsen & Llinas, 1984;
Turner et al. 1994), while at holding potentials positive to
-60 mV EPSPs, typically, drove the firing of a single
action potential. The differences in the output pattern of
interneurones and TC neurones were not due to differing
amplitudes of EPSPs (see Turner et al. 1994).

A

Previous investigations of the sensory input to rat and cat
TC neurones have indicated the involvement of NMDA and
non-NMDA EAA receptors (Scharfman, Lu, Guido, Adams
& Sherman, 1990; Leresche, 1992; Turner et al. 1994). In
interneurones the bath application of the non-NMDA
receptor antagonist CNQX (10 /LM, n = 2) abolished the
fast component of the EPSP (Fig. 9B). In the presence of
CNQX the remaining EPSP had a relatively smaller
amplitude and slower time to peak (Fig. 9B), and was
sensitive to the NMDA receptor antagonist DL-AP5
(100 /SM; Fig. 9C). Following application of DL-AP5, a low
amplitude (<4 mV), slowly rising synaptic potential
remained (Fig. 9). Since the pharmacological profile of this
potential was not investigated, it remains to be established
if this slow EPSP is generated by the activation of other
receptors, or if it is a residual product of the lack of full
antagonism of NMDA and non-NMDA receptors (see
Turner et al. 1994).

B

Control

CNOX (10 /M)

-60 mV
I 20 mV
-65

-80 -J

D

c
CNQX

+

AP5

Superposition

(100.um)

-50 mV

200 ms

30 ms

I10 mV

-65

-75 mV

30 ms

-80~

Figure 9. EPSPs of interneurones are mediated by the activation of NMDA and non-NMDA
receptors
A, the voltage-dependent profile of control EPSPs evoked by the electrical stimulation of the optic tract is
shown at two different time bases. B, the bath application of the non-NMDA receptor antagonist CNQX
(10 /M) reduced the amplitude of the fast EPSP at all potential levels, leaving a lower amplitude, more
slowly rising component that did not reach the threshold for the generation of action potentials. C, the
additional application of the NMDA receptor antagonist DL-AP5 (100 AM) led to a further decrement in
the amplitude of the EPSP leaving a low amplitude (< 4 mV) EPSP with a very slow rise time, which
failed to evoke action potentials even when generated at -50 mV. D, the superposition of the EPSPs
recorded at a level of -75 mV at a fast time base more clearly illustrates the effects of the antagonists.
The amplitude of action potentials has been truncated for clarity.

J

Physiol. 490.1

Interneurones of the dLGN

A

141

B
-45 mv

-47 mV

120 mV

10 mV
-65

-67

VA4

-.-

5s

50 ms

-85

-75

GABA

OT

C

__>

1r

I

Baclofen (80 piM)

-60 mV

g

m

1

1

F

F

Interneurone
-111111 iiiiiiijillillilill 111111 111111111fl il :11111111

1:1111111iiiiiiiiiiiiiMilli 111:11,11i,11,11;,1111,11,11M

fM IIM7 'T , -nT

M7. MTM-MMM

2 min

Baclofen (80 FM)

120 mV

-63 mV
Jil! l

TC neurone

li111111 li ii 1

lit 11111li li i illil I1

0 4 nA

YT 1[I, lli.EfV1JTT
ii i 111II 11111lll
:iilJiiiiiI
IlllTllmll

Figure 10. Interneurones are powerfully inhibited by the activation of GABAA, but not GABAB
receptors
A, electrical stimulation of the optic tract evoked an IPSP in this interneurone, which reversed in polarity
between -65 and -70 mV. B, the iontophoretic application of GABA (70 nA) to the environment of a
different interneurone led to a membrane potential hyperpolarization accompanied by a decrease in
apparent input resistance: the polarity of this response was found to reverse between -65 and -70 mV.
C, the bath application of the GABAB receptor agonist baclofen (80 gM) to this interneurone led to a small
membrane potential hyperpolarization accompanied by a decrease in apparent input resistance, which
persisted when the membrane potential was set to the control level during the passage of positive current
through the recording electrode. Note that this was the only interneurone in which baclofen had any
effect. The lower records illustrate the typical effects of baclofen (80 FM) on the membrane properties of a
TC neurone recorded from the same brain slice. Note that the magnitude of the baclofen-elicited
membrane potential hyperpolarization and decrease in apparent input resistance are greater than those of
the interneurone. In the continuous voltage traces downward deflections represent electrotonic potentials
evoked by the repeated delivery of constant current pulses. In the recording made from the interneurone,
upward deflections represent the firing of action potentials in response to positive current pulses and in
the TC neurones upward deflections represent the generation of low threshold Ca2+ potentials and action
potentials evoked at the break of hyperpolarizing electrotonic potentials. The amplitude of these
deflections has been truncated by the frequency response of the chart recorder.

142

J

S. R. Williams and others

In addition to stimulus-evoked EPSPs, spontaneous EPSPs
were recorded from all interneurones (Fig. 2A) and in
-30% of TC neurones (not illustrated). The structure of
this activity was found to be different between the two
groups. In interneurones an almost continuous barrage of
spontaneous EPSPs was observed throughout the recording
period (Fig. 2A), whilst spontaneous EPSPs of TC neurones
were observed in clusters, the individual elements of which
were often observed to summate. Spontaneous EPSPs were
found to be predominantly mediated by the activation of
non-NMDA receptors as the application of CNQX (10 /M)
greatly reduced the amplitude of these synaptic potentials.
The presence of NMDA receptor-mediated spontaneous
EPSPs cannot, however, be excluded as the slow rise time
and low amplitude of such events could have hampered their
detection.
In other interneurones the pattern of stimulus-evoked
activity was dominated by inhibition (n =3; Fig. lOA).
IPSPs were found to reverse in polarity between -65 and
-70 mV, in a similar manner to responses to the iontophoretic application of GABA (n = 2) to the environment of
other interneurones (Fig. lOB). The potency of the
inhibition produced by either electrical stimulation or
iontophoretic application of GABA was demonstrated by
the silencing of on-going action potential firing (not
illustrated). In order to compare the differential effects of
the activation of GABAA and GABAB receptors, we applied
by bath perfusion the selective GABAB receptor agonists
baclofen (at concentrations up to 100 /M; n = 4; Crunelli et
al. 1988) and y-hydroxybutyrate (GHB; 1-3 mM; n = 3;
Williams, Turner & Crunelli, 1995b). In the majority of
interneurones these agonists had no effect on either the

membrane potential or apparent input resistance. However,
in one interneurone (Fig. lOC) the application of baclofen
(80 AM) led to a small membrane potential hyperpolarization
(7 mV) and decrease in apparent input resistance. This
effect was, however, relatively weak in comparison with the
effects of the same concentration of baclofen on the
membrane potential and apparent input resistance of a TC
neurone recorded from the same preparation (Fig. 1 OC).

Spontaneously occurring IPSPs were recorded from
interneurones (Fig. 11) and TC neurones (not illustrated).
These IPSPs were found to be intermixed with spontaneous
EPSPs and subthresold oscillatory activity of interneurones,
but they could be clearly identified by their reversal
potential of between -65 and -70 mV (Fig. 11). The
presence of spontaneous IPSPs suggests that interneurones
are subject to a tonic level of inhibition when maintained in
brain slices in vitro. The similar reversal potential of
spontaneous and stimulus-evoked IPSPs suggests the
activation of a common type of receptor.

DISCUSSION
The main conclusions of this investigation are that (i) two
populations of neurones, termed interneurones and TC
neurones, with distinct electroresponsiveness and morphological properties, can be distinguished in the rat dLGN;
(ii) interneurones possess characteristic electrophysiological
features that include the shape of single action potentials
and their fAHP, the presence of a slow and pronounced
spike-frequency adaptation, the presence of post-train
sADPs, the generation of subthreshold oscillatory activity
with a frequency of -8 Hz, the low frequency firing at the

-47 mV

5 mv
-52

500

-65

PhysioL 490.1

ms

pl_

-85 '%"Y

Figure 11. Interneurones are subject to tonic inhibition
Spontaneous IPSPs were recorded from an interneurone at different holding potentials, achieved by the
tonic passage of current though the recording electrode (-47 mV is the resting potential). The IPSPs
appear to reverse in polarity at holding potentials between -65 and -70 mV. In the upper voltage record
IPSPs are intermixed with the intrinsic subthreshold oscillatory activity of this interneurone; in the lower
records the individual IPSPs are distinguishable.

J Physiol. 490.1

Interneurones of the dLGN

break of hyperpolarizing voltage excursions and the nearly
linear nature of voltage-current relationships; and (iii) there
are interneurone to interneurone inhibitory interactions in
the rat dLGN.

Comparative anatomical properties
By comparison with the results of Golgi impregnation
(Grossman et al. 1973; Gabbot et al. 1986) and HRP
injection studies (Crunelli et al. 1987), the morphology of
biocytin-injected neurones was classified as class A (TC
neurones) and class B (putative interneurones). The dorsoventral dendritic orientation of interneurones and the
radial fields of TC neurones are in accordance with previous
studies and may contribute to the their respective
rectangular and circular receptive field properties (Fukuda,
Sumitomo, Sugitani & Iwama, 1979). In the present study
the recording of neurones of different morphologies and
electrophysiological responsiveness in single brain slices
clearly indicates a heterogeneous population of neurones in
the rat dLGN. Although we encountered subtle morphological differences between neurones classified as belonging
to the same group we have found no evidence for a finer
classification system of TC neurones.

Comparative electrophysiological properties
Passive properties
The passive membrane properties of interneurones and TC
neurones were found to be different. The resting potentials
of interneurones were significantly more positive and the
time constants shorter than those of TC neurones. As the
same methods, and occasionally the same electrode, were
used to record interneurones and TC neurones a comparison
between neuronal type should be valid. A degree of caution
should, however, be considered when interpreting these data,
as the influence of background synaptic activity (Bernander,
Douglas, Martin & Koch, 1991) and the degree of neuronal
damage, and so the generation of a somal shunt (Staley,
Otis & Mody, 1992), are thought to affect such measurements.
Indeed these points are important as interneurones were
found to have smaller somal areas and a greater degree of
spontaneous synaptic activity than TC neurones.

Rectification properties
The rectification properties of interneurones were found to
be distinct from those of TC neurones: voltage-current
relationships of interneurones lacked the prominent
rectification properties of TC neurones that are expressed in
both the depolarized and hyperpolarized direction. The
rectifiation of the voltage-current relationship of TC
neurones in the depolarized direction is thought to be
mediated by slowly inactivating K+ currents (Huguenard &
Prince, 1991). These slowly inactivating K+ currents in
concert with a more transient IA-like current act to delay
the onset of action potential firing (Huguenard & Prince,
1991). The lack of a substantial delay to firing in
interneurones and the absence of rectification in the
depolarized direction suggests a minimal expresson of these

143

currents. However, the brief delay to firing in interneurones, when action potentials were evoked from holding
potentials negative to -60 mV, is indicative of the presence
of fast transient outward K+ currents, e.g. IA. These data
suggest that interneurones should fire briskly in response to
afferent activity, as indicated by recordings of identified cat
dLGN interneurones in vivo (Humphrey & Weller, 1988).
The rectification of the voltage-current relationship of TC
neurones in the hyperpolarized direction is thought to be
generated by the activation of a slow, mixed cation current,
Ih (McCormick & Pape, 1990) and a fast K+-mediated
current (Pollard & Crunelli, 1988). A similar slow
rectification was expressed in some interneurones; although
the magnitude of such rectification was not as great as that
of TC neurones, this parameter cannot be used to classify
neuronal type. In addition to time-dependent rectification
we observed the presence of steady rectification of interneurones, which led to a greater apparent input resistance at
potentials close to firing threshold. These data indicate that
although interneurones have nearly linear voltage-current
relationships the effects of excitatory and inhibitory inputs
will be greater at subthreshold membrane potentials.

Burst firing
At the break of hyperpolarizing voltage excursions, interneurones and TC neurones were found to generate a
transient depolarizing potential that was crowned by the
firing of action potentials; the frequency of such firing was,
however, significantly slower in interneurones. The voltage
range over which such activity could be generated was also
different between groups, suggesting that the voltagedependence of the current(s) that underlie(s) the transient
depolarizing potentials are different. Previous analysis has
indicated that the transient depolarizing potentials of TC
neurones are generated by a low threshold Ca2+ current, IT'
that is available for activation at potentials negative to
--65 mV (Crunelli et al. 1989). A recent investigation has
revealed that interneurones, dissociated from the rat
dLGN, also express an IT-like current. The steady-state
activation and inactivation curves of this current were,
however, found to be shifted by - 10 mV positive to that of
TC neurones (Pape et al. 1994). Such a difference in the
voltage dependence of IT between neurones may explain
the different voltage range over which we observed
transient depolarizing potentials and burst firing between
neuronal type. In dissociated interneurones the expression
of IT in current clamp recordings was found to be masked
by the activation of an IA-like current (Pape et al. 1994). It
is not clear to what extent such a mechanism operates in
interneurones maintained in more intact preparations, as
rebound firing has been observed from recordings of
putative thalamic interneurones of the guinea-pig (Jahnsen
& Llinas, 1984) and morphologically identified interneurones of the cat dLGN (McCormick & Pape, 1988). The
measurement of I, and IA and an analysis of the effects of
pharmacological blockade of IA are therefore required for a
full interpretation of this behaviour.

144

S. R. Williams and others

Subthreshold oscillations
Interneurones were found to express intrinsic (-8 Hz),
subthreshold membrane potential oscillatory activity. These
activities did not resemble the well-characterized low
frequency (<4 Hz; McCormick & Pape, 1990; Leresche et al.
1991; Steriade, Curro Dossi & Nunez, 1991; Williams et al.
1995b) and high frequency (> 20 Hz; Steriade, Curro Dossi,
Pare & Oakson, 1991) oscillatory activities of TC neurones,
but were similar to the subthreshold oscillatory activity
expressed by cortical stellate neurones (Klink & Alonso,
1993). The ionic basis of the oscillatory activity of cortical
stellate neurones has been shown to be mediated by the
activation of a persistent Na+ current and a K+ current
activated at subthreshold membrane potentials (Klink &
Alonso, 1993). Although we did not investigate the ionic
basis of the oscillatory activity of interneurones, the
similarity in the electrophysiological behaviour of thalamic
interneurones and cortical stellate neurones, in terms of
their rectification properties, discharge patterns and in
particular the presence of a slow depolarizing ramp prepotential preceding the fast upstroke of the single action
potentials, suggests that the oscillatory activity of dLGN
interneurones may be generated by a similar set of
membrane currents as those of stellate neurones. We
cannot, however, rule out the possibility that the subthreshold oscillatory activity of interneurones is mediated
by a different mechanism involving, for example, the
activation of low and high threshold Ca currents.
The membrane potential oscillatory activity of interneurones may drive a similar frequency of action potential
output, leading to the generation of IPSPs in interneurones
and TC neurones. In our preparations we recorded
spontaneous IPSPs from interneurones and TC neurones.
Previous investigations of TC neurones recorded in vitro
(Leresche, 1992) and in vivo (Steriade, Deschenes, Domich
& Mulle, 1985) have reported spontaneous IPSPs; indeed in
vivo the frequency of spontaneous IPSPs was found to be
centred at -10 Hz, when the main thalamic nuclei were
functionally disconnected from the NRT (Steriade et at.
1985). The function of the oscillatory activity of
interneurones may be to drive an output of TC neurones
within a similar frequency range. Such an interpretation
has been made for the control of the output of pyramidal
neurones of the hippocampus, where spontaneous IPSPs,
occurring within the frequency range of 40 Hz, have been
shown to drive the output of pyramidal neurones within a
similar frequency range (Whittington, Traub & Jefferys,
1995). The results of field recordings made from the dLGN
of unanaesthetized cats, have indicated the presence of
oscillatory activity with a frequency of -10 Hz (Chatila,
Milleret, Rougeul & Buser, 1993). The similarity between
this frequency and the frequency of subthreshold activity
of dLGN interneurones suggests that intereurones may be
involved in the synchronization of such a rhythm.

J

Physiol. 490.1

Action potential firing pattern
Interneurones, but not TC neurones, demonstrated discharge
patterns marked by a slow and pronounced spike-frequency
adaptation. Previous findings have indicated the discharge
pattern of interneurones of the cat dLGN recorded in vitro
and in vivo to be dominated by spike-frequency adaptation
(Humphrey & Weller, 1988; McCormick & Pape, 1988). Cat
dLGN interneurones, in contrast to those recorded here,
were, however, found to discharge at very high frequencies
(McCormick, Pape, Kisvardy & Eysel, 1992). The discharge
pattern of rat and cat dLGN interneurones may, therefore,
be different in terms of peak firing frequency, but not in the
structure of discharge patterns. These data indicate that
from holding potentials positive to -60 mV the output of
interneurones and TC neurones will be similar to transient
afferent inputs but become progressively dissimilar to more
sustained inputs. We suggest that the spike-frequency
adaptation of interneurones contributes to the formation of
the lagged responses (Humphrey & Weller, 1988; Heggelund
& Hartveit 1990) of some dLGN TC neurones. The lag period
is known to be formed, in the majority, by GABAA receptormediated inhibition (Heggelund & Hartveit, 1990) and is
thought to involve intra-geniculate circuits, but not inputs
from the PGN (Humphrey & Weller, 1988). As the
interneurones reported here were found to be driven by the
activation of non-NMDA and NMDA receptors, to have a
fast onset to action potential firing and to display prominent
spike-frequency adaptation, it is possible that through the
course of a retinal input the rate of firing decreases, leading
to a reduction in the temporal summation of IPSPs
(generated by the axonal output of interneurones) in
postsynaptic TC neurones. This mechanism may create a
greater degree of inhibition at the onset of retinal input that
is relatively amplified in lagged TC neurones, as the input to
these units is known to be mediated, preferentially, by the
activation of NMDA receptors (Heggelund & Hartveit, 1990).
Factors such as the voltage dependence and the rise and
decay times of NMDA receptor-mediated EPSPs may be
critical in the differential effects of inhibition in lagged and
non-lagged neurones (Heggelund & Hartveit, 1990).
Following a train of action potentials both interneurones
and TC neurones generated a sAHP; the time course of the
sAHP in interneurones was, however, truncated and the
potential replaced by a sADP, which in many cases had
action potentials and/or subthreshold oscillations imposed
upon it. This sADP may function to maintain the discharge
of interneurones following the termination of afferent
input, and by the generation of postsynaptic inhibition of
TC neurones add to the effects of the sAHP in these
neurones. These mechanisms may contribute to the
limitation of following frequency of TC neurones. It is,
therefore, of interest that blockade of GABAA receptormediated inhibition leads to an increased output of X-type
TC neurones in response to stimuli of increasing temporal
frequency (Berardi & Morrone, 1984).

J.

Physiol. 490.1

Interneurones of the dLGN

Excitation and inhibition of interneurones
EPSPs and IPSPs were generated in interneurones by low
frequency electrical stimulation of the optic tract; the
contribution made by EPSPs and IPSPs to the complex
synaptic response was found to be variable, as reported for
TC neurones (Crunelli et al. 1988). EPSPs generated in
interneurones were found to be bi-phasic and mediated by
the activation of non-NMDA and NMDA receptors, as has
been shown for EPSPs and excitatory postsynaptic
currents evoked in TC neurones (Scharfman et al. 1990;
Leresche, 1992; Turner et al. 1994). The pharmacological
profile of stimulus-evoked IPSPs was not directly
investigated, but we suggest that inhibition is mediated
predominantly by the activation of GABAA receptors since
(i) IPSPs and the responses to the iontophoretic application
of GABA were found to reverse at membrane potentials
between -65 and -70 mV, (ii) the rise time, duration and
reversal potential of IPSPs in interneurones were found to
be similar to GABAA receptor-mediated IPSPs evoked in
rat dLGN TC neurones by optic tract stimulation (Crunelli
et al. 1988), and (iii) the bath application of the GABAB
receptor agonists were, with the exception of one neurone,
found to have no effects on the membrane potential or
apparent input resistance of interneurones. The absence of
GABAB receptor-mediated IPSPs and the low sensitivity to
selective GABAB agonists is in contrast to that of TC
neurones (Crunelli et al. 1988; Soltesz et al. 1989; Williams
et al. 1995b), and suggest that interneurones express a
relatively low number of GABAB receptors.
These data demonstrate that stimulation of the optic tract
may reliably bring interneurones to firing threshold, and so
indicate that feed-forward IPSPs evoked in TC neurones
are generated at least in part through the axonal output of
dLGN interneurones. We cannot, however, exclude the
possibility that feed-forward IPSPs evoked in TC neurones
are mediated, in part, by the dendritic elements of
interneurones that are known to enter into and form a
triadic arrangement with optic tract terminals and TC
neurone dendrites (Grossman et al. 1973; Hamos et al.
1985). Our observations that interneurones are also subject
to stimulus-evoked inhibition indicate that the activities of
interneurones are controlled by inhibitory influences. The
cellular origin of this inhibition may be from fellow
interneurones of the dLGN, as brain slices were prepared in
a manner that excluded the NRT and so the pathway
underlying feed-back inhibition (Hale et al. 1982;
Lindstrom, 1982). Whilst it is possible that IPSPs were
generated by the direct depolarization of the axons of NRT
neurones, the low voltage of electrical stimuli and the
position of stimulating electrodes in the most lateral
margin of the optic tract suggests that current spread to
the axons of NRT neurones is unlikely. We therefore,
suggest that evoked IPSPs were generated by other dLGN
interneurones. In addition to stimulus-evoked inhibition,
interneurones were subject to spontaneous IPSPs. The

145

source of spontaneous IPSPs cannot be critically analysed,
and so they may be generated by the activities of other
interneurones, or axons of NRT neurones. No anatomical
or electrophysiological evidence gained from the rat visual
thalamus is available to describes a pathway from the NRT
to dLGN interneurones. In the cat unequivocal anatomical
evidence for the existence of such pathway is also lacking
(Cucchiaro, Uhlrich & Sherman, 1992), but electrophysiological evidence suggests such a pathway exists
(Ahlsen, Lindstrom & Lo, 1985). The site(s) of origin of
spontaneous IPSPs cannot fully be described until further
investigations are conducted.
The functional consequences of the inhibition of interneurones are difficult to interpret. Previous investigations,
however, have demonstrated that the magnitude of
stimulus-evoked GABAB receptor-mediated IPSPs may be
enhanced following the antagonism of GABAA receptors
(Crunelli et al. 1988; Soltesz et al. 1989). One interpretation
of these effects is that an antagonism of the GABAA
receptor-mediated inhibition of interneurones leads to an
increased action potential output of these neurones
(Crunelli et al. 1988; Soltesz et al. 1989). The presence of
interneurones that receive stimulus-evoked excitation and
GABAA receptor-mediated inhibition provide evidence in
favour of such a hypothesis. However, as we have not tested
the effects of GABAA receptor antagonists on the evoked
activity of interneurones we may only speculate that the
action potential output of these neurones would be
increased by the antagonism of GABAA receptors.
Nevertheless, the present data suggest that the nature of
the inhibition of TC neurones of the dLGN is dependent
upon the network properties of the nucleus. The nature of
inhibition of TC neurones and the mechanisms by which
the inhibition of interneurones is removed physiologically
may be of importance to the function of the dLGN.

AHLSEN, G. & LINDSTROM, S. (1982). Excitation of perigeniculate
neurones via axon collaterals of principle cells. Brain Research 236,
477-481.

AHLSEN, G., LINDSTROM, S. & Lo, F. S. (1985). Interaction between
inhibitory pathways to principle cells in the lateral geniculate

nucleus of the cat. Experimental Brain Research 58, 134-143.
BERARDI, N. & MORRONE, M. C. (1984). The role of gamma-aminobutyric acid mediated inhibition in the response properties of cat
lateral geniculate nucleus neurones. Journal of Physiology 377,
505-523.
BERNANDER, 0., DOUGLAS, R. J., MARTIN, K. A. C. & KOCH, C. (1991).
Synaptic background activity influences spatiotemporal integration
in single pyramidal cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA 88, 11569-11573.
CHATILA, M., MILLERET, C., ROUGEUL, A. & BUSER, P. (1993). Alpha
rhythm in the cat thalamus. Comptes Rendus de l'Academie des
Sciences, serie III, Science de la Vie 316, 51-58.
CRUNELLI, V., KELLY, J. S., LERESCHE, N. & PIRCHIO, M. (1987). The
ventral and dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the rat: intracellular
recordings in vitro. Journal of Physiology 384, 587-601.

146

S. R. Williams and others

CRUNELLI, V., HABY, M., JASSIK-GERSCHENFELD, D., LERESCHE, N. &
PIRCHIO, M. (1988). Cl- and K+ -dependent inhibitory postsynaptic

potentials

evoked by interneurones of the rat lateral geniculate
nucleus. Journal of Physiology 399, 153-176.
CRUNELLI, V., LIGHTOWLER, S. & POLLARD, C. E. (1989). A T-type
Ca2+ current underlies low-threshold Ca2+ potentials in cells of the
cat and rat lateral geniculate nucleus. Journal of Physiology 413,
543-561.
CUCCHIARO, J. B., UHLRICH, D. J. & SHERMAN, S. M. (1991).
Electron-microscopic analysis of synaptic input from the
perigeniculate nucleus to the A-laminae of the lateral geniculate
nucleus in cats. Journal of Comparative Neurology 319, 316-336.
DESCHENES, M., PARADIS, M., ROY, J. P. & STERIADE, M. (1984).
Electrophysiology of neurons of lateral thalamic nuclei in cat:
resting properties and burst discharges. Journal of Neurophysiology

51,1196-1219.

FUKUDA, Y., SUMITOMO, I., SUGITANI, M. & IWAMA, K. (1979).
Receptive-field properties of cells in the dorsal part of the albino
rat's lateral geniculate nucleus. Japanese Journal of Physiology 29,

283-307.
GABBOT, P. L.

A., SOMOGYI, J., STEWART, M. G. & HAMORI, J. (1986).
GABA-immunoreactive neurons in the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus of the rat: characterisation by combined Golgiimpregnation' and immunocytochemistry. Experimental Brain
Research 61, 311-322.
GROSSMAN, A., LIBERMAN, A. R. & WEBSTER, K. E. (1973). A Golgi
study of the rat lateral geniculate nucleus. Journal of Comparative
Neurology 150, 441-446.
HALE, P. T., SEFTON, A. J., BAUR, L. A. & COTTEE, L. J. (1982).
Interrelations of the rat's thalamic reticular and dorsal lateral
geniculate nuclei. Experimental Brain Research 45, 217-229.
HAMOS, J. E., VAN HORN, S. C., RACZKOWSKI, D., UHLRICH, D. J. &
SHERMAN, S. M. (1985). Synaptic connectivity of a local circuit
neurone in lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. Nature 317,
618-621.

HEGGELUND, P. & HARTVEIT, E. (1990). Neurotransmitter receptors

mediating excitatory input to cells in the cat lateral geniculate
Lagged cells. Journal of Neurophysiology 63,

nucleus. I.
1347-1372.

HUGUENARD, J. R. & PRINCE, D. A. (1991). Slow inactivation of a
TEA-sensitive K current in acutely isolated rat thalamic neurons.
Journal of Neurophysiology 66, 1316-1328.
HUMPHREY, A. L. & WELLER, R. E. (1988). Structural correlates of
functionally distinct X-cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the
cat. Journal of Comparative Neurology 268, 448-468.
JAHNSEN, H. & LLINAS R. (1984). Electrophysiological properties of
guinea-pig thalamic neurones: an in vitro study. Journal of
Physiology 349, 205-226.
JONES, H. E. & SILLITO, A. M. (1994). Responses of cells in the dorsal
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) during inactivation of the
perigeniculate nucleus. Neuroscience Abstracts 20, 61.12.
KLINK, R. & ALONSO, A. (1993). Ionic mechanisms for the
subthreshold oscillations and differential electroresponsiveness of
medial entorhinal cortex layer II neurons. Journal of
Neurophysiology 70, 144-157.
LERESCHE, N. (1992). Synaptic currents in thalamo-cortical neurons
of the rat lateral geniculate nucleus. European Journal of
Neuroscience 4, 595-602.

LERESCHE, N., LIGHTOWLER, S., SOLTESZ, I., JASSIK-GERSCHENFELD,
D. & CRUNELLI, V. (1991). Low-frequency oscillatory activities
intrinsic to rat and cat thalamocortical cells. Journal of Physiology

441,155-174.

J~Phy8iol. 490.1

LINDSTROM, S. (1982). Synaptic organization of inhibitory pathways

to principle cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. Brain
Research 234, 447-453.
MCCORMICK, D. A. & PAPE, H.-C. (1988). Acetylcholine inhibits
identified interneurons in the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. Nature
334, 246-248.
MCCORMICK, D. A. & PAPE, H.-C. (1990). Properties of a hyperpolarization-activated cation current and its role in rhythmic
oscillations in thalamic relay neurones. Journal of Physiology 431,
291-342.
MCCORMICK, D. A., PAPE, H.-C., KISVARDY, Z. & EYSEL, U. T. (1992).
Electrophysiological and pharmacological properties of LGNd
interneurons. Neuroscience Abstracts 18, 101.1.
MONTERO, V. M. (1987). Ultrastructural identification of synaptic
terminals from the axon of type 3 interneurons in the cat lateral
geniculate nucleus. Journal of Comparative Neurology 264,
268-283.
NORTON, T. T. & GODWIN, D. W. (1992). Inhibitory GABAergic control
of visual signals at the lateral geniculate nucleus. Progress in Brain
Research 90, 193-217.
PAPE, H. C., BUDDE, T., MAGER, R. & KISVARDAY, Z. F. (1994).
Prevention of Ca2+-mediated action potentials in GABAergic local
circuit neurones of rat thalamus by a transient K+ current. Journal
of Physiology 478, 403-422.
POLLARD, C. E. & CRUNELLI, V. (1988). Intrinsic membrane currents
in projection cells of the cat and rat lateral geniculate nucleus.
Neuroscience Letters S32, 29.
OHARA, P. T., LIBERMAN, A. R., HUNT, S. P. & WU, J.-Y. (1983).
Neural elements containing glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) in
the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the rat: immunohistochemical studies by light and electron microscopy. Neuroscience
8, 189-211.
SCHARFMAN, H. E., LU, S.-M., GUIDO, W., ADAMS, P. R. & SHERMAN,
S. M. (1990). N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors contribute to
EPSPs of cat lateral geniculate neurons recorded in thalamic slices.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 87,
4548-4552.
SILLITO, A. M. & KEMP, J. A. (1983). The influence of GABAergic
inhibitory processes on the receptive field structure of X and Y cells
in the cat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN). Brain Research
277, 63-77.
SOLTESZ, I., LIGHTOWLER, S., LERESCHE, N. & CRUNELLI, V. (1989).
On the properties and origin of the GABAB inhibitory postsynaptic
potential recorded in morphologically identified projection cells of
the cat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. Neuroscience 33, 23-33.
SPREAFICO, R., SCHMECHEL, D. E. & RUSTIONI, A. (1983). Cortical
relay neurones and interneurones in the N. ventralis posterolateralis
of cats: a horseradish peroxidase, electron-microscope, Golgi and
immunocytochemical study. Journal of Neuroscience 9, 491-509.
STALEY, K. J., OTIS, T. S. & MODY, I. (1992). Membrane properties of
dentate gyrus granule cells - comparison of sharp microelectrodes
and whole-cell recordings. Journal of Neurophysiology 67,
1346-1358.
STERIADE, M., CURRO DOSSI, R., PARE, D. & OAKSON, G. (1991). Fast
oscillations (20-40 Hz) in thalamocortical systems and their
potentiation by mesopontine chloinergic nuclei in the cat.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 88,
4396-4400.
STERIADE, M., CURRO DOSSI, R. & NUNEZ, A. (1991). Network
modulation of a slow intrinsic oscillation of cat thalamocortical
neurons implicated in sleep delta waves: cortical induced
synchronization and brainstem cholinergic suppression. Journal of
Neuroscience 11, 3200-3217.

J Physiol.490.1

Interneurones of the dLGN

STERIADE, M., DESCHENES, M., DOMICH, L. & MULLE, C. (1985).
Abolition of spindle oscillations in thalamic neurons disconnected
from nucleus reticularis thalami. Journal of Neurophysiology 54,
1473-1497.
TURNER, J. P., LERESCHE, N., GUYON, A., SOLTESZ, I. & CRUNELLI, V.
(1994). Sensory input and burst firing output of rat and cat
thalamocortical cells: the role of NMDA and non-NMDA receptors.
Journal of Physiology 480, 281-295.
WHITTINGTON, M. A., TRAUB, R. D. & JEFFERYS, J. G. R. (1995).
Synchronized oscillations in interneuron networks driven by
metabotropic glutamate receptor activation. Nature 373, 612-615.
WILLIAMS, S. R., ANDERSON, C. M. & CRUNELLI, V. (1995a).
Electrophysiological and morphological properties of local circuit
interneurones of the rat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus in vitro.
Journal of Physiology 483.P, 58P.
WILLIAMS, S. R., TURNER, J. P. & CRUNELLI, V. (1994).
Pharmacological and electrophysiological properties of local circuit
interneurones in brain slices of the rat dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus. Neuroscience Abstracts 20, 10.9.
WILLIAMS, S. R., TURNER, J. P. & CRUNELLI, V. (1995b). Gammahydroxybutyrate promotes oscillatory activity of rat and cat
thalamocortical neurons by a tonic GABAB receptor-mediated
hyperpola'ization. Neuroscience 66, 133-143.
.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Mr Tim Gould for help with anatomical
recovery and the manufacture of iontophoresis electrodes, Mr Bob
Jones for photography, Dr Andy Schering for his advice on
anatomical techniques and Dr Pedro Lowenstein for the use of
equipment. The support of the Wellcome Trust (grant 37089) is
gratefully acknowledged. S.R.W. was supported by a Wellcome
Prize Studentship.

Received 17 March 1995; accepted 5 July 1995.

147

