The Journal of Neuroscience, May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588

Dendritic Low-Threshold Calcium Currents in Thalamic Relay Cells
Alain Destexhe,1 Mike Neubig,1 Daniel Ulrich,2 and John Huguenard2
Laboratoire de Neurophysiologie, Faculte´ de Me´decine, Universite´ Laval, Quebec G1K 7P4, Canada, and 2Department
of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, California 94305

1

The low-threshold calcium current (IT ) underlies burst generation in thalamocortical (TC) relay cells and plays a central role in
the genesis of synchronized oscillations by thalamic circuits.
Here we have combined in vitro recordings and computational
modeling techniques to investigate the consequences of dendritically located IT in TC cells. Simulations of a reconstructed
TC cell were compared with the recordings obtained in the
same cell to constrain the values of its passive parameters.
T-current densities in soma and proximal dendrites were then
estimated by matching the model to voltage-clamp recordings
obtained in dissociated TC cells, which lack most of the dendrites. The distal dendritic T-current density was constrained by
recordings in intact TC cells, which show 5–14 times larger
peak T-current amplitudes compared with dissociated cells.
Comparison of the model with the recordings of the same cell

constrained further the T-current density in dendrites, which
had to be 4.5–7.6 times higher than in the soma to reproduce all
experimental results. Similar conclusions were reached using a
simplified three-compartment model. Functionally, the model
shows that the same amount of T-channels can lead to different
bursting behaviors if they are exclusively somatic or distributed
throughout the dendrites. In conclusion, this combination of
models and experiments shows that dendritic T-currents are
necessary to reproduce low-threshold calcium electrogenesis
in TC cells. Dendritic T-current may also have significant functional consequences, such as an efficient modulation of thalamic burst discharges by corticothalamic feedback.

Thalamocortical (TC) relay neurons play an essential role in the
genesis of synchronized oscillations in the thalamus and in the
thalamocortical system. This role is conveyed through their intrinsic ability to generate bursts of action potentials in rebound to
inhibition. The importance of the rebound response of TC cells
was first established by Andersen and Eccles (1962), who referred
it as “post-anodal exhaltation.” It was later characterized by in
vivo (Descheˆnes et al., 1984) and in vitro intracellular recordings
(Jahnsen and L lina´s, 1984a) and subsequently called the “lowthreshold spike” (LTS). It was also demonstrated that a lowthreshold calcium current (IT ) underlies LTS genesis in TC cells
(Jahnsen and L lina´s, 1984b).
Computational models of TC cells were designed in the early
work of Andersen and Rutjord (1964), who represented the
rebound response of these cells by a qualitative model. Later, the
biophysical characterization of the T-current by voltage-clamp
methods (Coulter et al., 1989; Huguenard and Prince, 1992)
provided precise data to build more detailed models. Like the
model introduced by Hodgkin and Huxley (1952) for action
potentials, the activation and inactivation properties of the
T-current are sufficient to predict rebound burst generation in
current clamp, as found by a number of modeling investigators
(for review, see Destexhe and Sejnowski, 1997).
Rebound bursts play an essential role at the network level.

Andersen and Eccles (1962) initially hypothesized that TC cells
are connected reciprocally with local circuit interneurons, making
a powerful oscillator through the interplay of inhibition and
rebound response. Although the details were incorrect, the principle was essentially right, as shown by in vivo (Steriade et al.,
1985, 1990) and slice experiments (von Krosigk et al., 1993;
Huguenard and Prince, 1992), which demonstrated that oscillations are generated by the interaction between TC cells and
thalamic reticular (RE) neurons. Computational models of thalamic circuits (Destexhe et al., 1993, 1996a; Wang et al., 1995;
Golomb et al., 1996; for review, see Destexhe and Sejnowski,
1997) explored oscillatory mechanisms based on an interplay of
inhibition and rebound burst. Possible consequences of this mechanism in synchronizing thalamocortical networks were modeled
recently (Destexhe et al., 1998).
Interactions involving T-channels may also take place at the
subcellular level. A previous study on RE cells suggested evidence for high T-current densities in distal dendrites (Destexhe et
al., 1996b). This study showed that dendritic T-current may explain critical electrophysiological features, such as differences in
the intrinsic firing properties between RE cells recorded in vivo
and in vitro. For TC cells, evidence for dendritic IT was obtained
recently from calcium imaging of proximal dendrites (Munsch et
al., 1997; Zhou et al., 1997). Given the considerable number of
synaptic terminals that contact the dendrites of TC cells (Jones,
1985; Liu et al., 1995), these data suggest that complex interactions between synaptic inputs and burst generation may take
place in the dendrites of TC cells.
To investigate these type of interactions, we have designed a
computational model of the dendritic T-current in TC cells based
on a combination of in vitro recordings and computational modeling techniques.

Received Dec. 9, 1997; revised Feb. 26, 1998; accepted March 5, 1998.
This research was supported by the Medical Research Council of Canada Grant
MT-13724 and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Grants
NS-06477 and NS-34774. We thank Dr. D. Amaral for kindly allowing us to use his
tracing system.
Simulation programs relative to this article can be obtained from the Internet at
http:// w w w.neuron.yale.edu /neuron.html or http://cns.fmed.ulaval.ca
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Alain Destexhe, Laboratoire de
Neurophysiologie, Faculte´ de Me´decine, Universite´ Laval, Quebec G1K 7P4, Canada.
Copyright © 1998 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/98/183574-15$05.00/0

Key words: computational models; voltage clamp; bursting;
oscillations; low-threshold spikes; dendritic calcium currents

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588 3575

MATERIALS AND METHODS
In vitro recordings. The present study focuses on neurons from the
ventrobasal nucleus of the thalamus of rats. All in vitro recordings were
obtained in TC neurons from the ventrobasal nucleus of young rats
[postnatal day 8 (P8)–P15], using either intact slice preparation or acutely
dissociated TC cells. All current-clamp recordings were at a temperature
of 34 –36°C, whereas voltage-clamp recordings were done at 24°C. The
methods were described in detail by Huguenard and Prince (1992).
The following procedure was used for calcium current recording in
intact neurons in slices (modified from the procedure of Ulrich and
Huguenard, 1995). Brain slices (200 ␮m) were transferred into a recording chamber and superf used (2 ml /min at room temperature) with
standard artificial C SF containing (in mM): 126 NaC l, 26 NaHC O3 , 2.5
KC l, 1.25 NaH2PO4 , 2 MgC l2 , 2 C aC l2 , 0.001 tetrodotoxin, and 10
glucose, equilibrated with 95% O2 and 5% C O2. Patch pipettes were
pulled from borosilicate glass (Garner Glass, C laremont, CA) and filled
with a solution containing (in mM): 120 C s gluconate, 11 C sC l, 1 MgC l2 ,
1 C aC l2 , 10 H EPES, and 11 EGTA, pH adjusted to 7.3 with C sOH,
osmolality 290 mOsm. Whole-cell recordings were made with a List
EPC -7 amplifier. Series resistance was in the range of 2.5–12 M⍀ and
was electronically compensated by 70%.
Morpholog y. A TC neuron was recorded in intact slice preparation
and stained with biocytin. The cell is shown in Figure 1 A (also see
Huguenard and Prince, 1992). We reconstructed the morphology of
that cell from serial sections of 80 ␮m, using a computerized tracing
system (Eutectic Electronics, Raleigh, NC) kindly provided by Prof. D.
Amaral (University of C alifornia, Davis, CA). With the 100ϫ objective used and correction for tissue shrinkage, the theoretical accuracy
with which dendritic diameters can be measured was 0.1 ␮m. However,
because of biocytin artifacts, the diameters of some distal dendrites
could not be traced precisely, although lengths and branching patterns
were accurately reconstructed. In those cases, the diameters were
artificially rescaled to match the diameter profile of dendritic segments
that could be reconstructed accurately. This procedure led to diameter
profiles consistent with previous morphological studies of rat ventrobasal TC cells (Ohara and Havton, 1994). The reconstructed TC
neuron is shown in Figure 1 B.
The reconstructed morphology of the TC cell was incorporated into
N EURON, which can simulate the cable geometry from the threedimensional coordinates provided by the tracing of the neuron (for more
details, see Hines and C arnevale, 1997). The two equivalent cable
models studied had either 208 or 1214 compartments and gave nearly
identical results.
Computational models of dissociated cells. In acutely dissociated TC
cells, most of the dendritic arborizations were removed by the dissociation procedure (Fig. 2 A1) (also see Huguenard and Prince, 1992).
Simulations of acutely dissociated TC cells used a cable geometry obtained by truncating the dendrites of the original cell (Fig. 2 B1). The
model shown in Figure 2 B1 was obtained by keeping the soma and
proximal bits of dendrites of the reconstructed cell based on the morphology of dissociated TC cells (Fig. 2 B2) (also see Huguenard and
Prince, 1992) and the ratio of input capacitance measured experimentally
(113 pF for the intact cell and 16.7 pF on average for dissociated TC cells;
Huguenard and Prince, 1992), leading to an area of ϳ3500 ␮m 2. Distal
dendrites were removed from the reconstructed cell until the model
matched this area, leading to a dissociated cell model, which had only the
soma and two proximal dendritic branches, with a total membrane area
of 3430 ␮m 2 (Fig. 2 B1).
Voltage-dependent currents. Voltage-dependent conductances were
modeled using a Hodgkin –Huxley type of kinetic model (Hodgkin and
Huxley, 1952). Because no data exist to constrain the localization and
kinetics of the Na ϩ and K ϩ currents responsible for fast action potentials, they were inserted in the soma, and their kinetics were taken from
a model of hippocampal pyramidal cells (Traub and Miles, 1991), assuming a resting potential of VT ϭ Ϫ52 mV in their equations, maximal
conductances of g៮ Na ϭ 100 mS/cm 2 and g៮ K ϭ 100 mS/cm 2, and reversal
potentials of ENa ϭ 50 mV and EK ϭ Ϫ100 mV. This model was already
shown to be adequate to model the repetitive firing within bursts of
action potentials (Traub and Miles, 1991; Destexhe et al., 1996a,b).
The kinetics of activation and inactivation of IT in TC cells were
modified from a previous model (Huguenard and McCormick, 1992).
The activation f unctions were empirically corrected to account for both
voltage-clamp and current-clamp data on TC cells, assuming a Ϯ3 mV
error on voltage (see below).
The usual Nernst equation describes the near-equilibrium behavior of

Figure 1. Recording, staining, reconstruction, and simulation based on of
the same cellular geometry. A, Thalamic relay cell from rat ventrobasal
nucleus, intracellularly recorded in slices (Huguenard and Prince, 1992).
B, Three-dimensional reconstruction of the same cell. The complete
dendritic arbor (of which only part appears in A) was reconstructed from
thin serial sections. C, Computational model of the same cell. The
simulation (continuous line) is compared with passive responses obtained
while recording that cell (noisy trace). The adjustment of the model to the
experimental response by a simplex fitting procedure provides estimates
of passive parameters (see Results).
ion channels in which the current is described by Ohm’s law. Because of
the nonlinear and far-from-equilibrium behavior of calcium currents, a
different formalism must be used (Hille, 1992), such as the constant-field
equations:

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

3576 J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588

Figure 2. Low amplitudes of T-current in dissociated TC cells under voltage clamp. A1, T ypical structure of dissociated TC cells, where most of the
dendrites were removed by the dissociation procedure, leaving soma and proximal dendrites intact. A2, Voltage-clamp recordings of the T-current in a
dissociated TC cell. The voltage-clamp protocol consisted in conditioning the cell at various voltage levels (from Ϫ125 to Ϫ60 mV) for 1 sec and then
stepping the voltage to Ϫ30 mV, revealing the transient activation of the current. The peak current was ϳ400 pA (different cell than that shown in A1).
B1, Model of a dissociated TC cell, consisting of the soma with proximal bits of dendrites, adjusted from the input capacitance of the model. B2, Same
voltage-clamp protocol as in A2, simulated with the dissociated cell model. The model reproduces the peak amplitude of the T-current in dissociated
cells with a moderate density of T-channels (permeability of 1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec). This procedure provides an estimate of the perisomatic T-current
density in TC cells. All experiments and simulations at 24°C.

I T ϭ P៮ C a m 2h G ͑ V, Cao , Cai͒
˙ ϭϪ
m

1
͑ m Ϫ m ϱ͑ V ͒͒
␶ m͑ V ͒

˙ϭϪ
h

1
͑ h Ϫ h ϱ͑ V ͒͒ ,
␶ h͑ V ͒

(1)

where P៮ C a (in centimeters per second) is the maximum permeability of
the membrane to C a 2ϩ ions, and m and h are, respectively, the activation
and inactivation variables. G(V,Cao ,Cai ) is a nonlinear f unction of
voltage and ionic concentrations:

G ͑ V, Cao , Cai͒ ϭ Z 2F 2V/RT

Cai Ϫ Cao exp͑ ϪZFV/RT ͒
,
1 Ϫ exp͑ ϪZFV/RT ͒

experiments on dissociated cells were done using 3 mM extracellular
C a 2ϩ, whereas physiological conditions are 1.5–2 mM). In addition, an
overall depolarizing shift of 3 mV was necessary to reproduce the
current-clamp simulations of TC cells in the present paper. The optimal
f unctions that accounted for both voltage-clamp and current-clamp data
on TC cells were:

m ϱ͑ V ͒ ϭ 1/ ͑ 1 ϩ exp͓ Ϫ͑ V ϩ 56 ͒ /6.2 ͔͒
h ϱ͑ V ͒ ϭ 1/ ͑ 1 ϩ exp͓͑ V ϩ 80 ͒ /4 ͔͒ .
The voltage-dependent time constant for activation was:

␶ m͑ V ͒ ϭ 0.204 ϩ 0.333/ ͑ exp͓ Ϫ͑ V ϩ 131 ͒ /16.7 ͔
(2)

where Z ϭ 2 is the valence of calcium ions, F is the Faraday constant, R
is the gas constant, and T is the temperature in Kelvins. C ai and C ao are
the intracellular and extracellular C a 2ϩ molar concentrations,
respectively.
The expressions for steady-state activation and inactivation f unctions
were first obtained from voltage-clamp experiments on dissociated TC
cells (Huguenard and Prince, 1992). The activation f unction was empirically corrected to account for the contamination of inactivation
(Huguenard and McCormick, 1992). An overall hyperpolarizing shift of
2 mV was applied to compensate for screening charge (voltage-clamp

(3)

ϩ exp͓͑ V ϩ 15.8 ͒ /18.2 ͔ ),
and for inactivation:

0.333 exp͓͑ V ϩ 466 ͒ /66.6 ͔
␶ h͑ V ͒ ϭ 9.32 ϩ 0.333 exp͓ Ϫ͑ V ϩ 21 ͒ /10.5 ͔

for V Ͻ Ϫ81 mV
for V Ͼ Ϫ81 mV.

(4)

These f unctions correspond to an external C a 2ϩ concentration of 2 mM
and a temperature of 36°C. All voltage-clamp simulations were done at
24°C assuming Q10 values of 2.5 for both m and h, whereas current-clamp
behavior was simulated at 34°C.
C alcium handling was modeled by a first-order system representing

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588 3577

C a 2ϩ pumps and buffers, as described by McCormick and Huguenard
(1992), with a time constant of decay of C a 2ϩ of 5 msec. At equilibrium,
the free intracellular C a 2ϩ concentration was 240 nM, and the extracellular C a 2ϩ concentration was 2 mM, corresponding to a reversal potential
of approximately ϩ120 mV.
Simplified models. To generate simplified representations of TC cells, a
method was used that consisted of collapsing the dendritic arbor into
fewer compartments. We have used a reduction method based on the
conservation of axial resistance (modified from Bush and Sejnowski,
1993).
The method consists of merging dendritic branches into equivalent
cylinders, which preserve the axial resistance of the original branches. If
the cross-sectional area of the equivalent cylinder equals the sum of each
individual cross-sectional area, this is equivalent to summing parallel
resistances, because 1/r ϭ ͚j1/R( j), where R( j) are the axial resistances
of the collapsed branches. The radius (r) of the equivalent cylinder is
then given by:

rϭ

ͱ͸

r 2i ,

(5)

dendritic correction. These values correspond to the optimal set of
passive parameters obtained by fitting the passive responses of the
three-compartment model to experimental voltage-clamp responses (see
Results).
A single-compartment model was also generated, and its membrane
area was adjusted such that this model matches passive voltage-clamp
recordings (see Fig. 11 B2). The optimal model had a length and diameter
of 100 ␮m and 76.6 ␮m, respectively.
We used only one anatomically reconstructed TC cell in this study, in
addition to morphologically simplified models. The behavior of the
detailed and simplified models was nearly identical (see Results), which
suggests that the particular details of the morphology of the cell were
unimportant in the context of the present study. The behavior reported
in this paper was extremely robust to changes in the values of the
parameters, as illustrated by the nearly identical behavior obtained in
models with different cable geometries.
All simulations were done using N EURON (Hines and C arnevale,
1997) on Sparc-20 and Ultra-1 workstations (Sun Microsystems, Mountain View, CA).

i

where ri are the radii of the collapsed branches.
The length (l ) of the equivalent cylinder is taken as an average of the
lengths of the collapsed branches (li ), weighted by their respective
diameters (ri ), such as:

lϭ

͸
͸

l
i i
i

ri

.

(6)

ri

This modification of the Bush – Sejnowski algorithm was added to accommodate the merging of branches of very different length, which is often
encountered while reducing dendritic morphologies, such that of the
reconstructed TC cell studied here.
Because the total membrane area is not conserved in this method, the
reduced model may not have a correct input resistance. This is compensated by introducing in each equivalent cylinder a dendritic correction
factor (Cd ), which rescales the values of conductances ( gi ) and membrane capacitance (Cm ) in the dendrites such that:

gЈi ϭ C d g i ,

CЈm ϭ C d C m .

(7)

Cd is estimated such that the reduced model has the correct input
resistance and time constant (Bush and Sejnowski, 1993).
The three compartments of the simplified model had the following
lengths (l ) and diameters (diam): l ϭ 38.4 ␮m, and diam ϭ 26 ␮m for the
soma (area, 2624 ␮m 2); l ϭ 12.5 ␮m, and diam ϭ 10.3 ␮m for the
proximal segment (area, 403 ␮m 2); and l ϭ 84.7 ␮m, and diam ϭ 8.5 ␮m
for the distal segment (area, 2261 ␮m 2). The total area was 5289 ␮m 2.
The dendritic correction factor was Cd ϭ 8.02, as calculated from the
ratio of the total surface area of the dendritic segments to their equivalent cylinders. A more accurate estimation of Cd ϭ 7.95 was obtained by
fitting simulations to voltage-clamp recordings until the threecompartment model had input resistance and other passive properties
matching the reconstructed cell perfectly (see Fig. 11 A2).
The equations for the three-compartment model were:

C m˙
V S ϭ Ϫg L ͓ V S Ϫ E L ͔ Ϫ I T͑ V S͒ Ϫ g SM ͓ V S Ϫ V M͔ /A 1
C d C m˙
V M ϭ ϪC d g L ͓ V M Ϫ E L ͔ Ϫ C d I T ͑ V M͒ Ϫ g SM ͓ V M Ϫ V S͔ /A 2
(8)
Ϫ g MD ͓ V M Ϫ V D͔ /A 2
C d C m˙
V D ϭ ϪC d g L ͓ V D Ϫ E L ͔ Ϫ C d I T͑ V D͒ Ϫ g MD ͓ V D Ϫ V M͔ /A 3 ,
where VS , VM , and VD are the voltage of somatic, middle, and distal
compartments, respectively. Cm ϭ 0.878 ␮F/cm 2 is the membrane capacitance; gL ϭ 0.0379 mS/cm 2 is the leak conductance; EL ϭ Ϫ69.85 mV is
the leak reversal potential; IT is the T-current (according to Eq. 1); gSM
ϭ 5.19 ␮S and gMD ϭ 0.70 ␮S are the axial conductances (derived from
axial resistivity and cross-sectional area of the compartments); A1–A3 are
the areas of each compartment (see above); and Cd ϭ 7.95 is the

RESULTS
We begin by showing how the thalamic relay cell model was
successively constrained by the reconstructed dendritic morphology of a cell recorded experimentally, by voltage-clamp recordings to set its passive properties, by dissociated cell recordings to
set its perisomatic T-current density, and by intact-cell recordings
to set the T-current density in distal dendrites (“distal” will be
used in this paper to refer to the dendritic region Ͼ11 ␮m from
the soma). The properties of TC cells in voltage clamp and
current clamp are then examined in terms of dendritic T-current.
Finally, simplified models of the TC cell are generated and
studied in the same context.

Morphology and passive properties
A TC cell from rat ventrobasal nucleus (shown in Fig. 1 A) (also
see Huguenard and Prince, 1992) was reconstructed using a
three-dimensional tracing system. The reconstructed TC cell is
shown in Fig. 1 B (see Materials and Methods for details concerning the tracing of the cell). There were 11 primary dendrites,
having a total length of 7095 ␮m; the total membrane area of the
cell was 23,980.5 ␮m 2, including 2625 ␮m 2 for the soma, which
was ϳ20 –25 ␮m in diameter (assuming that a 0.1 ␮m error on
diameters leads to approximately Ϯ9% error on the total membrane area). The dendritic arborizations tended to be organized
in a bush-like structure, similar to previous morphological observations (Jones, 1985).
Voltage-clamp recordings of passive responses obtained in that
cell are shown in Fig. 1 A. These recordings were used to estimate
the passive parameters by fitting the model to the data (Fig. 1C).
Because model and data correspond to the exact same cellular
geometry, this procedure leads to a unique set of passive parameters if they are uniform (Rall et al., 1992).
To perform passive fitting, leak currents were inserted in all
compartments of the reconstructed cell model. The values of the
passive parameters [leak conductance ( gL ), leak reversal potential (EL ), axial resistivity (Ra ), and specific membrane capacitance (Cm )] and the electrode series resistance (Rs ) were obtained by fitting the simulations to experimental data using a
simplex algorithm (Press et al., 1986). At each iteration of the
simplex algorithm, the model was run, and the root mean squared
(rms) error between the experimental recording and the model
was minimized. This procedure was repeated from different initial conditions to avoid unstable values of parameters. The values
of passive parameters were considered uniform and were consistent with the values estimated from the recordings. Approxi-

3578 J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588

mately 50 –300 iterations were required to converge to a minimum error.
The optimal set of values obtained was Cm ϭ 0.878 ␮F/cm 2; Ra
ϭ 173 ⍀cm; gL ϭ 0.0379 mS/cm 2; EL ϭ Ϫ69.85 mV; and Rs ϭ 8.1
M⍀. This optimal set was obtained from different initial conditions with ranges of values tested of 0.2–2 ␮F/cm 2, 50 –500 ⍀cm,
0.02– 0.2 mS/cm 2, Ϫ70 to Ϫ80 mV, and 1– 40 M⍀, respectively.
The ranges of parameter values yielding similar fitting errors
(within a 2 pA maximal rms error) were Cm ϭ 0.856 – 0.899
␮F/cm 2; Ra ϭ 147–200 ⍀cm; gL ϭ 0.0376 – 0.0383 mS/cm 2; EL ϭ
Ϫ69.72-Ϫ69.97 mV; and Rs ϭ 7.0 –9.5 M⍀. These ranges were
obtained by varying each parameter individually around the optimal fit. A more detailed analysis, in which the search procedure
was based on experimental precision or on experimental confidence intervals of electrophysiological and morphological measurements, yielded correspondingly larger acceptable ranges of
values (Neubig and Destexhe, 1997) (M. Neubig and A. Destexhe,
unpublished data).
Because the window current of IT may affect the resting membrane potential of the cell, the same fitting was also performed in
the presence of somatic – dendritic distribution of T-current. In
this case, the values obtained were very close (within SE) to that
of the passive fitting, except for the leak reversal potential that
needed to be readjusted to compensate for the window current,
leading to more negative values (EL ϭ Ϫ70.1 to Ϫ73.4 mV for
dendritic T-current densities of 1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 to 12.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ5
cm/sec; see below).
In these conditions, the electrotonic length of the longest dendrite was 0.34 space constants (as calculated using the optimal set
of passive parameters shown above). The attenuation characteristics of the cell were estimated as follows. A current pulse of 10
msec and 0.1 nA was injected in the middle of a representative
terminal branch in the intact-cell model with passive currents.
The attenuation was calculated by measuring the maximal voltage
deflections evoked by this current injection, there and at the
soma. The ratio obtained was ϳ10-fold (0.098). The opposite
protocol was also followed (current injected in soma while measuring in dendrites), and the ratio of voltage deflections was close
to unity (0.91).
This TC cell is therefore relatively compact electrotonically,
contrary to RE cells analyzed with similar methods (see Destexhe
et al., 1996b) but similar to the conclusions of previous studies on
TC cells (Bloomfield et al., 1987; Crunelli et al., 1987). Further
comparison is difficult, however, because these studies were on a
different animal, using different types of recording electrodes,
different passive parameters, and a different method to estimate
the electrotonic length.

Density of T-current in soma and proximal dendrites
Acutely dissociated neurons were used to characterize the
T-current in TC cells (Huguenard and Prince, 1992). This preparation is very usef ul because the dissociation procedure removes
most of the dendritic arbor, leaving the soma intact with proximal
bits of dendrites (Fig. 2 A1). This preparation therefore leads to
very compact cells, in which voltage-clamp recordings can be
made with minimal space clamp errors. The kinetics of the
T-current used in the present paper (see Materials and Methods)
were obtained from such recordings (see Huguenard and McCormick, 1992; Huguenard and Prince, 1992).
As illustrated in a previous model (Destexhe et al., 1996b),
another advantage of the dissociated cell preparation is that it
allows a direct estimate of the T-current density in the periso-

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

matic region of the cell. This estimation was performed by matching a dissociated cell model to voltage-clamp recordings of the
T-current in dissociated TC cells. The model used is shown in
Figure 2 B1 and was obtained by adjusting the geometry of the
model to the input capacitance measured in experimental recordings (see Materials and Methods).
Voltage-clamp recordings in dissociated TC cells show peak
T-current amplitudes of ϳ400 pA (Fig. 2 A2). Similar T-current
peak amplitudes were obtained assuming a uniform density of
T-current in the dissociated cell model (1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec; Fig.
2 B2). A range of T-current densities of 0.5–3.0 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec
reproduced the range of T-current amplitudes measured in dissociated TC cells (350 Ϯ 27 pA; n ϭ 49; from Coulter et al., 1989;
and 280 Ϯ 23 pA; n ϭ 26; from Huguenard and Prince, 1992).

Increased density of T-current in more distal dendrites
The presence of T-current was demonstrated in the dendrites of
TC cells by optical imaging techniques (Munsch et al., 1997; Zhou
et al., 1997). Given the fact that intact TC cells have a considerably more extended dendritic area than dissociated TC cells, this
would predict a higher T-current amplitude in intact TC cells than
shown in Figure 2 A2 for dissociated cells. This is indeed the case,
as demonstrated by voltage-clamp recordings of intact TC cells
(Fig. 3). The maximal T-current amplitude ranged from ϳ2 to 8.3
nA in different intact cells (5.8 Ϯ 1.7 nA; n ϭ 7), which is on
average ϳ16 –21 times larger than in dissociated cells.
The model of the reconstructed TC cell was used to estimate
the range of T-current needed in dendrites to account for these
data. As shown in Fig. 4, the density of T-current estimated from
dissociated cells (1.5–2.0 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec) was insufficient to
reproduce T-current amplitudes comparable to intact cells (Fig.
4 A), even when the same density was extended to the entire
dendritic tree (Fig. 4 B). To obtain T-current peak amplitudes of
ϳ2 nA and more, an increased density of T-current had to be
assumed in distal dendrites (Fig. 4C,D). To reproduce peak
amplitude in the range of 2–7 nA of Figure 3, the range of
dendritic densities needed in the model were of 1.7– 6.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ5
cm/sec for low series resistance (Rs ϭ 0.01 M⍀) and 2.5–50 ϫ
10 Ϫ5 cm/sec for high series resistances (Rs ϭ 12 M⍀), which is up
to 29 times the density in the soma.

Distal dendritic T-currents affect
current-voltage relations
A further indication for the presence of higher density of
T-current in dendrites is obtained from the properties of the
current–voltage (I–V ) relations. I–V curves obtained from
voltage-clamp recordings of TC cells show a marked difference
between dissociated (Fig. 5A) and intact cells (Fig. 5B). Not only
the maximum T-current reaches much higher values, as shown in
the previous section, but the shape of the I–V curve is different;
the peak occurs at approximately Ϫ40 to Ϫ30 mV in dissociated
TC cells, whereas in intact cells, the I–V curve was significantly
shifted, peaking at Ϫ70 to Ϫ60 mV.
In the dissociated cell model, simulated I–V curves had a
behavior consistent with experimental data (Fig. 5, compare
A,C). In intact cells, however, the behavior depended markedly
on the density of the T-current. With higher T-current densities in
distal dendrites, the I–V curve was comparable to that recorded in
intact cells during experiments (Fig. 5, compare B,D, circles). On
the other hand, with uniform T-current densities, the I–V curves
were not consistent with experimental observations, neither for
the peak amplitude, which was too low, nor for the position of the

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588 3579

Figure 3. High amplitudes of T-current in intact TC cells under
voltage clamp. Inactivation protocol in four TC cells ( A–D)
recorded in thalamic slices of the ventrobasal nucleus. For each
cell, the voltage-clamp protocol giving rise to the largest peak
current is shown. The inactivation protocol consisted of conditioning the cell at various voltage levels (from Ϫ105 to Ϫ40 mV)
for 1 sec and then stepping the voltage to a fixed voltage value
(Ϫ55 mV in A, Ϫ65 mV in B, Ϫ60 mV in C, Ϫ45 mV in D). For
comparison, a similar protocol in a dissociated cell is shown in
the bottom at the same calibration. All cells were the same age
(P12); recording temperature was 24°C in all cases.

peak current, which was too depolarized (Fig. 5D, squares). By
varying parameters (see below), we found that I–V curve shift
were consistent with those observed in experiments only when the
density of T-current was significantly increased in distal dendrites. Voltage-clamp simulations using the intact-cell model further showed that the I–V curve shift is attributable to poor
voltage-clamp of the cell, which could be attributable to spaceclamp and /or series resistance artifacts. During a somatic voltage
clamp, the dendritic T-channels are not easily controllable, as
shown previously in simulated thalamic reticular cells (Destexhe
et al., 1996b). The same phenomenon occurs for TC cells as
shown in Fig. 6. From a holding potential of Ϫ115 mV, stepping
the voltage to a hyperpolarized value (Ϫ65 mV), at which only
few T-channels should open, activates ϳ10% of the total
T-current available for a uniform density of 1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec
(Fig. 6 A). On the other hand, with high distal dendritic densities
of T-current, the same protocol led to activation of almost the
totality of the available T-current (Fig. 6 B). In this case, a lowthreshold spike was elicited in the dendrites and therefore the
recorded current showed anomalously large currents at the soma.
The inflection of the current trace in Figure 6 B is indeed indicative of poor voltage control (see Huguenard et al., 1988). Consequently, the peak of the I–V curve will occur at more hyperpolarized values because of the poor control over dendritic
T-channels.
The shift of I–V curve caused by poor voltage control was
further illustrated by showing the effect of various parameters

(Fig. 7). The I–V curve shift was affected by the total amount of
T-channels (Fig. 7A) and the series resistance of the voltageclamp electrode (Fig. 7B). The T-channel distribution also affected the I–V curve shift both for distributions with same peak
current (Fig. 7C) and for distributions where the total amount of
T-channels was kept constant (Fig. 7D). These properties show
that the I–V curve shift is attributable to a poor control over some,
possibly dendritic, portion of T-channels in the cell. This is in
agreement with a previous modeling study, which also concluded
that imperfect space clamp results in alterations of I–V curves
(Mu
¨ller and Lux, 1993).

A test for the quality of voltage control over
the dendrites
The poor voltage clamp evidenced above should be detectable by
appropriate experiments. Tail currents can be used to assess the
quality of voltage control (Huguenard, 1998). This protocol is
illustrated in Fig. 8. In the dissociated cell model (Fig. 8 A), the
amplitude of the tail currents follows closely the time course of
activation and inactivation of the current, as expected from an
experiment with good clamp (Huguenard, 1998). On the other
hand, the same protocol applied to the intact-cell model produced
significant deviations of tail current amplitudes (Fig. 8 B). Such
deviations occurred despite the fact that the model of Figure 8 B
had moderate density of dendritic T-current. The mismatch between tail currents and T-current activation was paralleled with
poor clamp in this model. Because tail currents can be easily

3580 J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

Simulations therefore suggest that the voltage-clamp recordings of dissociated TC cells were always in conditions of good
space clamp, as indicated by the well clamped voltage in soma and
proximal dendrites (data not shown). On the other hand, simulations of intact TC cells clearly indicate poor control (see voltage
traces in Fig. 6 B), in agreement with the tail current test shown
in Figure 8.

Burst generation in TC cells with dendritic T-current

Figure 4. High densities of dendritic T-current are needed to match the
T-current amplitude recorded in intact TC cells. The model shows the
same inactivation protocol using different distributions of T-current. In all
cases, the perisomatic IT density was compatible with recordings in
dissociated cells (permeability of 1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec in soma and proximal
dendrites), whereas the density of IT in distal dendrites was varied. A, No
dendritic T-current. IT was limited to the perisomatic region. B, Uniform
T-current. IT had the same density throughout the neuron. C, Twice
dendritic. IT density was twice in distal dendrites compared with the
perisomatic density. D, Five times dendritic. Distal dendrites had five
times as much T-current density as in the perisomatic region. The latter
produced peak IT amplitudes comparable to the average value of intact
TC cells recorded in slices (Fig. 3). All simulations at 24°C.

measured experimentally, this figure therefore provides an important experimentally verifiable prediction to test that poor
voltage clamp is responsible for significant alterations of
T-current I–V curves in intact TC cells.

A further argument in favor of dendritic T-current was given by
current-clamp simulations. Current-clamp recordings were obtained in the cell shown in Figure 1 A and consisted of injecting
depolarizing pulses from rest (Ϫ73 to Ϫ74 mV). Current pulses
of 50 and 75 pA amplitude gave rise to low-threshold spikes (LTS)
with one and two action potentials, respectively (Fig. 9A). In the
model, assuming a uniform density of T-current based on voltageclamp recordings in dissociated TC cells, the same current-clamp
protocol could not give rise to LTS (Fig. 9B), despite a large range
of parameters explored, such as the resting level of the cell and
the kinetics of IT.
With high densities of T-current in distal dendrites, LTS generation similar to the intact cell could be produced (Fig. 9C).
One- and two-spike bursts were generated by 50 and 75 pA
current injection, respectively, whereas the one-spike burst had a
longer latency (although not as long as in experiments). The
latency could be increased by using more negative resting membrane potential (data not shown), but in this case the resting
values were not in agreement with the data. The correct latency
of the first burst may therefore depend on the presence of other
currents not included here, such as Ih , which is active at rest and
therefore likely to affect the resting level of the cell (Pape, 1996).
Taking the number of spikes as the reference behavior, only a
narrow range of T-current densities gave rise to burst responses
with one and two spikes as in Figure 9A. Too low densities did not
produce LTS, as in the case of uniform T-current (Fig. 9B),
whereas too high densities gave rise to a correct burst for 50 pA
current injection but generated an exceedingly powerful burst at
75 pA (data not shown). Therefore, having access to the currentclamp recordings of the reconstructed TC cell constitutes a very
strong constraint for the total amount of T-current in the cell.
Correct burst behavior could be obtained using uniform high
densities of T-current (ϳ7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec), but that model was
inconsistent with dissociated cells. Assuming that the perisomatic
density of T-current was identical to that estimated from dissociated cells (1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec), a relatively narrow range of
T-current density in distal dendrites gave rise to burst generation
consistent with experimental data. This type of T-channel distribution was in agreement with all voltage-clamp and currentclamp data.
Assuming a Ϯ3 mV error on all voltages (the voltage of the
experimental data of Fig. 9A as well as the voltage of the kinetics
of IT ) gave a possible range of dendritic densities of T-current
between 7.6 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 and 12.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec, which is ϳ4.5–7.6
times the density of the soma.
To compare the above dendritic T-current permeabilities with
published values, they were converted into conductances by simulating the calcium current using the Nernst relation (Hille,
1992). The range of dendritic T-current conductance obtained
was ϳ0.8 –1.4 mS/cm 2 (8 –14 pS/␮m 2). This estimated conductance range is slightly larger but close to the average T-current
densities of 7–10 pS/␮m 2 measured in the dendrites of hippocampal pyramidal cells (Magee and Johnston, 1995).

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588 3581

Figure 5. Current–voltage relationship in TC cells under voltage clamp. The graphs show the peak amplitude
of T-current obtained during activation protocols under
voltage clamp; each protocol consisted of conditioning
the cell at Ϫ105 mV for 1 sec and stepping to various
voltage values (shown in abscissa). A, I–V relation for
the T-current in a dissociated TC cell. The peak current
was of ϳ0.4 nA and occurred at Ϫ40 mV. B, I–V curve
in an intact TC cell (same cell as in Fig. 3C). The peak
T-current was here of ϳ2.5 nA and occurred at Ϫ60
mV. The steep decline of the I–V curve above Ϫ60 mV
is probably attributable to incomplete block of outward
currents by cesium. C, Dissociated cell model. A similar
I–V curve as in A could be reproduced with moderate
T-current density (permeability of 1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec).
D, Intact-cell model. In this case, the I–V curve of the
intact cell shown in B could be reproduced using a
larger T-current density in distal dendrites (2.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ5
cm/sec) compared with the perisomatic region (1.7 ϫ
10 Ϫ5 cm/sec) and a series resistance of Rs ϭ 12 M⍀
(circles). This I–V curve is compared with the same
simulation with uniform T-current density of 1.7 ϫ
10 Ϫ5 cm/sec (squares). All activation protocols consisted of conditioning the cell at Ϫ115 mV for 1 sec and
then stepping the voltage to the values indicated. The
peak currents shown are leak-subtracted. All experiments and simulations at 24°C.

Figure 6. Poor clamp together with distal dendritic
T-currents alters current–voltage relations. Voltageclamp simulation of the intact TC cell model consisting of conditioning the cell at Ϫ115 mV for 1 sec and
stepping the voltage to Ϫ65 mV. The voltage is shown
in soma and distal dendrite, as well as the current. The
maximal current that could be evoked (peak of the I–V
curve) is shown by dotted lines for comparison. A,
uniform T-channel density of 1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec shows
little current activation at Ϫ65 mV (0.187 nA), representing ϳ10% of the total T-current. B, same simulation with high densities of T-current in dendrites
(1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec perisomatic and 8 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec
in distal dendrites). In this case, large uncontrolled
voltage transients occurred in both soma and dendrites, leading to a large peak current (4.09 nA), representing 98% of the total available T-current. Series
resistance was 12 M⍀, and temperature was 24°C in
both cases.

T-channels can be controlled more efficiently if they
are dendritic
An important question is how does dendritic current location
shape the burst of TC cells. To answer this question, the reconstructed TC cell was simulated using two different distributions of
T-current with same total number of T-channels (Fig. 10, Somatic
& dendritic, Somatic onl y). For increasing intensities of injected

current, the cell successively generates passive responses, subthreshold LTS, and full-blown bursts with sodium spikes (Fig.
10 A). The generation of these LTS responses shows differences
between somatic and somatodendritic distributions of T-current,
with LTS evokable by smaller current injections for somatic-only
distributions (Fig. 10 B). This property was already apparent from
I–V curves, in which somatically localized T-channels led to

3582 J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

Figure 7. Poor clamp and dendritic T-current can explain the shift in the current–voltage curves in intact
and dissociated TC cells. A, Effect of the total amount of
T-channels. At 100%, the perisomatic and dendritic
T-current densities were of 1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 and 8 ϫ 10 Ϫ5
cm/sec, respectively. The total density of T-current was
uniformly decreased by a factor of 2 (50%) and 4 (25%).
B, Effect of the series resistance. Same simulation as
100% in A, using three different values of the series
resistance. C. Effect of the distribution of T-channels.
Two different T-channel distributions were adjusted
such as to get similar peak currents at the soma (Rs ϭ 5
M⍀). Somatic & dendritic, 1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec perisomatic and 8 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec in dendrites at 11 ␮m and
more from the soma (ϳ82% of membrane area). Somatic only, 42.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec in soma and no
T-current in dendrites. D, Same graph, but in this case
the Somatic only density (53.3 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec) was
adjusted such that the total number of T-channels was
the same as for Somatic & dendritic. All simulations at
24°C.

Figure 8. Tail currents are indicative of the
quality of voltage control over the dendrites.
Left panels, Tail currents. The cell was conditioned at Ϫ115 mV for 1 sec, and then the
voltage was stepped to Ϫ30 mV, leading to transient activation of the T-current. Tail currents
are obtained when the voltage is stepped back to
Ϫ115 mV at different instants during this activation. Right panels, Comparison of the time
course of the T-current (continuous line) with
the peak tail current amplitudes (squares), scaled
to each other. A perfect match of these two
currents is indicative of perfect clamp in the cell
(Huguenard, 1998). A, Dissociated cell model.
The tail currents match closely the activation of
the T-current. B, Intact-cell model. In this case,
the mismatch between tail currents and
T-current activation was paralleled with poor
clamp (T-current densities were 1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /
sec perisomatic and 2.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec in distal
dendrites). All currents were subtracted from
leak and capacitive components (24°C).

higher peak T-current amplitudes compared with T-channels distributed in dendrites (Fig. 7D, triangles). Therefore, localizing
T-channels in the dendrites decreases the excitability of the cell
with respect to LTS generation.
An equally important question is how these properties can be
modulated by other currents in the dendrites. In particular, the

dendrites of TC cells are densely covered by synaptic terminals
from various excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Under conditions
of tonic activity that characterizes active states (Steriade et al.,
1990), TC cells are therefore bombarded by mixed excitatory and
inhibitory inputs, which should lead to significant dendritic shunt.
The effect of dendritic shunt conductances on burst generation is

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588 3583

Figure 9. Correct low-threshold spike generation in intact TC cells requires high densities of dendritic
T-current. Current-clamp recordings of LTS in the recorded intact TC cell are compared with simulations
based on the same cellular geometry. A, Experimental
recordings of LTS in the intact TC cell at rest using two
different amplitudes of injected depolarizing current: 50
pA (thin trace) and 75 pA (thick trace). B, Simulations of
the same current injection did not generate LTS using a
uniform density of T-current based on dissociated cells
(1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec). C, Successf ul LTS generation with
increased density of T-current in distal dendrites. In B
and C, the gray levels indicate the density of T-current in
different regions of the cell: 1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec (light gray)
and 8.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec (black). All experiments and
simulations at 34°C.

depicted in Figure 10C. In this case, the differences between
somatic only and somatic and dendritic T-channel localization are
remarkably enhanced (Fig. 10C). In addition, the LTS response
was less steep, leading to more “graded” bursting behavior in the
presence of shunt conductances. More importantly, dendritic
shunt shifted the LTS response curve more efficiently for dendritic T-channels (Fig. 10, compare Somatic & dendritic curves in
B,C) than for somatic T-current (Fig. 10, compare Somatic only
curves). These simulations therefore show that the same amount
of T-channels can be controlled differently if they are exclusively
somatic or distributed throughout the dendrites. Possible functional consequences of this property in the behavior of TC cells in
vivo will be considered in Discussion.

Simplified models of TC cells
To provide a simplified representation of somatodendritic interactions during low-threshold spike generation in TC cells, we
have designed a simplified model by collapsing the dendritic
structure into a few compartments based on the conservation of

axial resistance, a theme previously proposed by Bush and
Sejnowski (1993). A modified version of this method was used
here (see Materials and Methods). The reduction was based on a
partition of the cell into three regions, as considered previously:
(1) the soma, (2) proximal dendrites (corresponding to those of
dissociated cells), and (3) the remaining (distal) dendrites. Based
on this partition, the collapse algorithm was applied to generate a
reduced model with three compartments, each corresponding to
the aforementioned regions. The model obtained is shown in
Figure 11 A1.
The next step was to obtain passive properties consistent with
experimental data. The simplified model was endowed with the
same passive parameters as the detailed model, and a dendritic
correction factor (Cd ) was applied to the dendrites to compensate
for their reduced membrane area (see Materials and Methods).
The value of dendritic correction was adjusted by fitting the
passive responses of the model to that obtained during voltageclamp recordings (Fig. 11 A2). With Cd ϭ 7.95 (range, 7.92–7.97)

3584 J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

Figure 10. Consequence of dendritic T-current in shaping the burst response of thalamic relay cells. A, Three representative types of response to
depolarizing current injection from rest: passive ( P), subthreshold ( S ), and burst ( B) responses. B, LTS peak amplitude represented as a function of the
amplitude of injected current in the soma. For this simulation, fast Na ϩ and K ϩ currents underlying action potentials were not included, and the
reconstructed TC cell had two different somatodendritic distributions of T-current: Somatic & dendritic (1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec perisomatic and 8.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ5
cm/sec dendritic) and Soma onl y (density of 56.53 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec in soma with none in dendrites; adjusted such that the total number of T-channels was
the same as for Somatic & Dendritic). The fact that these two curves do not overlap shows the effect of channel segregation on burst generation in normal
conditions. C, LTS peak amplitudes in the presence of dendritic shunt conductances. With a dendritic shunt conductance of gL ϭ 0.15 mS/cm 2, the burst
response becomes significantly different whether the T-current is located in the dendrites or exclusively in the soma.

the model fitted the data remarkably well (Fig. 11 A2). This value
is close to the reduction ratio of dendritic membrane, which was
8.02 for this model.
When T-channels were inserted using somatic and dendritic
densities as described in previous sections, the simplified model
generated voltage-clamp behavior very close to the detailed
model, with very similar peak amplitudes (Fig. 11 A3, compare
triangles, squares). With a slightly increased density of T-current in
dendrites, the simplified model could match closely the complete
I–V curve of the detailed model (Fig. 11 A3, compare circles,
squares).
Using these T-current densities, the behavior was examined in
current clamp. First, the somatodendritic density that matched
closely the I–V curve generated low-threshold responses very
similar to the data and the detailed model (compare Figs. 11 A4,
9). Second, like the detailed model, the genesis of correct lowthreshold bursts required increased densities of dendritic currents
in the simplified model (Fig. 12 A). This latter point suggests that
high densities of dendritic calcium currents are needed to be

consistent with all data, and that this conclusion is independent of
the particular morphological details of the model.
The effects of the electrical separation of currents in the cell
were tested with the three-compartment model (Fig. 12 B). As in
the detailed model, localizing T-channels in the dendrites diminished the excitability of the cell for LTS generation. These differences are markedly enhanced in the presence of dendritic
shunt conductances (Fig. 12C), similar to the detailed model
(compare with Fig. 10 B, C). This demonstrates that these types of
somatodendritic interactions do not need the precise dendritic
morphology to be simulated, but they critically need an increased
density of T-current in dendrites.
Finally, a single-compartment model of the TC cell was generated for comparison. A first possibility was to remove the dendrites from the detailed model, but in this case, the isolated soma
did not generate bursts of action potentials and had an incorrect
input resistance. A second possibility was to increase the membrane area until the model matched the input resistance of the
intact cell. In this case, with passive properties identical to the

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588 3585

Figure 11. Simplified models of TC cells. A1, Three-compartment model obtained by collapsing the dendritic morphology of the intact cell (see
Materials and Methods). A2, Adjustment of the dendritic correction of the model to obtain passive properties consistent with experimental recordings.
A3, I–V curves in voltage clamp, comparing the intact-cell model (squares) with the simplified model with the same density of T-current (triangles; same
densities as in Fig. 9C). A slightly increased dendritic density matched the I–V curve of the intact model (circles; dendritic density of 9.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec).
A4, Low-threshold bursts with the simplified model (9.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec). B1, Single-compartment model of the TC cell. B2, Adjustment of the membrane
area such that the model fits experimental passive responses. B3, I–V curves in voltage clamp, with intact-cell model (squares) and its best match with
the single-compartment model (triangles; density of 6 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec). The circles indicate the model needed to reproduce current-clamp behavior
(density of 8 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm/sec). B4, L ow-threshold bursts with the single-compartment model (density of 8 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec).

detailed model, the total membrane area was adjusted by fitting
the one-compartment model until it matched the passive responses of the TC cells under voltage clamp (Fig. 11 B2).
The density of T-current was calculated such that the total
amount of T-channels was identical to the detailed model. In this
case, the peak amplitude of the T-current was similar to the

detailed model, but the I–V curves were different (Fig. 11 B3,
compare triangles, squares). Contrary to the three-compartment
model, it was not possible to match these I–V curves. In these
conditions, the model did not generate low-threshold burst responses consistent with experimental data (data not shown).
However, if the T-current density was increased, such that the

3586 J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

Figure 12. Burst responses in the threecompartment model of TC cells with dendritic
T-current. A, Current-clamp simulations of LTS
generation in the three-compartment TC cell
model using two different amplitudes of injected
depolarizing current (50 and 75 pA from rest;
Fig. 9B,C). A1, No LTS could be generated with
uniform T-current density based on dissociated
cell recordings (1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec, indicated by
gray shades in the scheme). A2, Successf ul LTS
generation in the simplified model with high
densities of T-current in dendrites (9.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ5
cm/sec, indicated by black shades in the
scheme). B, LTS peak amplitude represented as
a function of the amplitude of injected current
in the soma (similar description as in Fig. 10).
Somatodendritic T-current distributions were
Somatic & dendritic (density of 1.7 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /
sec perisomatic and 9.5 ϫ 10 Ϫ5 cm /sec dendritic) and Somatic only (density of 56.36 ϫ
10 Ϫ5 cm/sec exclusively in the soma). Burst
responses and the differences attributable to
channel segregation in the cell were similar to
those of the reconstructed TC cell model (Fig.
10 B). C, LTS peak amplitudes in the presence
of dendritic shunt conductances ( gL ϭ 0.15 mS/
cm 2). The enhanced differences between the
two curves are comparable to those of the reconstructed TC cell model (Fig. 10C).

shape of the I–V curve was similar to the detailed model (Fig.
11 B3, compare circles, squares), then the single-compartment
model could generate low-threshold burst responses consistent
with experiments (Fig. 11 B4 ).
This single-compartment model is of course too simple to
account for data from intact and dissociated TC cells in the same
time, but it still generates LTS consistent with intact TC cells in
current clamp. Single-compartment models would therefore be
more appropriate for building network simulations in which the
central aim is to reproduce the rebound burst of TC cells (for
example, see Destexhe et al., 1996a, 1998). Compared with the
reconstructed cell model, the three-compartment model is ϳ66
times faster to simulate; therefore this type of model should be
useful to simulate the electrophysiological behavior of single TC
cells with more computational efficiency.

DISCUSSION
Having obtained current-clamp and voltage-clamp data from the
same cell in conjunction with computational models based on the
same cellular geometry is a rare opportunity. We have here
combined these in vitro and computational approaches to constrain as much as possible the presence of T-current in the
dendrites of TC cells. Dendritic T-current was needed to reproduce three essential features: (1) T-current recordings from dissociated TC cells, (2) T-current recordings from intact TC cells,
and (3) the low-threshold burst response in intact TC cells. Not
only dendritic T-current was needed, which was not a surprising
result in light of optical imaging evidence (Munsch et al., 1997;
Zhou et al., 1997), but the density needed to reproduce electrophysiological data was ϳ4.5–7.6 times that of the somatic region.
In the next sections, we discuss successively the rationale leading
us to conclude that TC cells possess high densities of dendritic
T-current, possible sources of errors of the procedures followed
here, and possible physiological consequences of the unexpectedly high T-current density in the distal dendrites of TC cells.

Dendritic T-current in TC cells
Optical-imaging experiments have clearly demonstrated the presence of T-current in the dendrites of TC cells (Munsch et al.,
1997; Zhou et al., 1997), but no estimate of density was possible.
In the present paper, we have estimated the T-current density in
the dendrites of TC cells by combining electrophysiological measurements with computational models, with the following constraints. (1) The peak amplitude of T-current in dissociated TC
cells was ϳ400 pA. Because these cells have lost most of the
dendritic tree, matching a dissociated cell model to those recordings provides estimates of the perisomatic density of T-current.
(2) We show here that the peak T-current amplitude in intact TC
cells is fairly large (2– 8.3 nA), and simulations of a reconstructed
TC cell show that not only the T-current must be present in
dendrites, but its dendritic density must be increased several
times to reproduce these experimental measurements. (3) I–V
curves of intact TC cells under voltage clamp are significantly
shifted compared with that of dissociated TC cells. This phenomenon could be replicated based on a poor voltage control over
dendritic T-channels. (4) The current-clamp behavior of the reconstructed TC cell was compared with the traces obtained in that
cell during its recording. This turned out to be the most constraining data, because burst behavior needed a more narrow
range of T-current densities in dendrites, ϳ4.5–7.6 times higher
than in the soma. (5) Similar conclusions were reached using a
simplified model with only two dendritic compartments, provided
that the most distal compartment had high densities of
T-channels.
Our recordings and models therefore point to the conclusion
that TC cells have somatodendritic distribution of T channels
with most channels concentrated in distal portions of the dendrites (Ͼ11 ␮m from soma), similar to the conclusions reached
for thalamic RE cells (Destexhe et al., 1996b) and hippocampal
pyramidal cells (Karst et al., 1993).

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

Possible errors in constraining the density of
dendritic T-current
First, one basic assumption was that the somatic density was
accurately given by studying dissociated cells. There could be
destruction of a significant portion of T-channels during the
dissociation procedure, which would affect the present results.
However, the fact that the T-current has a relatively constant
amplitude among different dissociated TC cells indicates a relative integrity of the pool of T-channels in that preparation.
Moreover, the same approach was used successf ully to estimate
the somatic and dendritic T-current densities in a previous study
on thalamic reticular cells (Destexhe et al., 1996b). In that case,
the estimated T-current densities reproduced typical electrophysiological features of RE cells, which is consistent with a low
T-current density in the proximal region.
Second, TC cells are characterized by many other intrinsic
membrane currents (McCormick and Huguenard, 1992), which
were not included here. In particular, the hyperpolarizationactivated inward current (Ih ) is active at rest and may significantly
influence the procedure followed here. However, simulations in
the presence of Ih suggest that the same conclusions about the
T-current density still hold (data not shown). There is no tight
constraint for the density of Ih in intact TC cells of that age. When
these constraints will become available, an adjustment of this
model may be needed.
Third, the cell studied may not be representative of adult TC
cells. The voltage-clamp recordings of intact TC cells were obtained from young rats (P12), and so was the reconstructed cell
(P10). Therefore, the conclusions drawn here are valid for TC
cells of that age, and f urther studies would be needed to characterize adult TC cells. However, TC cells of P10 –P12 have already
reached an advanced developmental state for low-threshold spike
genesis (Perez Velazquez and C arlen, 1996; Pirchio et al., 1997;
Warren and Jones, 1997), which suggests that the characteristics
found here are also valid for adult TC cells. Moreover, the fact
that the dendritic branches of TC cells are longer in adults
compared with young animals (Warren and Jones, 1997) indicates
that adult cells are electrotonically less compact, and that the
effect of dendritic IT may be even more pronounced than that
suggested here.

Possible functional consequences of dendritic
T-current in TC cells
The first possible consequence of dendritic T-current in TC cells
is that it is likely to enhance the burst response in rebound to
IPSPs. The dendrites of TC cells are densely covered by inhibitory synaptic terminals from RE cells (Jones, 1985), which evoke
very powerf ul I PSPs that can trigger rebound bursts (Steriade
and Descheˆnes, 1984; Bal et al., 1995a,b). A high density of
T-current in the very same site as these terminals seems therefore
optimal to facilitate the genesis of bursts in rebound to dendritic
IPSPs. On the other hand, RE cells receive excitatory synaptic
contacts from TC cells and have a more hyperpolarized resting
state, at which the T-current is deinactivated (Contreras et al.,
1993; Bal et al., 1995b; Destexhe et al., 1996b). Because they may
also have dendritic T-current, RE cells seem optimally designed
to produce bursts in response to EPSPs. Taken together, these
data suggest that the interconnected TC –RE structure with dendritic T-currents makes a very efficient and robust oscillator, in
which cells very powerf ully elicit bursts in each other.
A second possible consequence is that cortical synapses may
also interact with burst genesis and play a modulatory role. This

J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588 3587

type of interaction was already shown in a previous modeling
study on thalamic RE cells (Destexhe et al., 1996b); the dendrites
of RE cells are characterized by a high density of excitatory
synapses of cortical origin (Jones, 1985). Therefore, the increase
of background activity of excitatory synapses may counteract the
genesis of the rebound burst if the T-channels are dendritic,
because synaptic currents would act directly on T-channels at
their precise site of localization, through shunting and depolarization. These types of local dendritic interactions were simulated
by the model and had the consequence that moderate levels of
excitatory synaptic activity interacted with burst genesis in the
dendrites, leading to firing properties consistent with in vivo
recordings (Destexhe et al., 1996b).
The present results suggest that similar interactions may also
take place in the dendrites of TC cells: the evidence for high
dendritic densities of T-current must be paralleled with morphological evidence showing that the dendrites of TC cells receive a
considerable amount of corticothalamic synaptic terminals (Liu et
al., 1995; Erisir et al., 1997), which are more numerous than
terminals from sensory afferents (Jones, 1985). In addition, the
dendrites of TC cell are also densely covered by inhibitory synapses (Jones, 1985; Liu et al., 1995). The model suggests that the
T-current can be modulated more effectively when it is distributed in dendrites (Fig. 10), leading to a finer and more graded
control of bursts. We propose that a possible reason to explain the
presence of most of the T-channels in dendrites is a fine tuning of
bursts by synaptic currents, through shunting mechanisms. This
type of dendritic interactions could provide a very fast switch
between the burst mode (cortical synapses silent) and the tonic
mode (sustained cortical drive). In addition to conventional neuromodulatory mechanisms, which operate over time scales of
hundreds of milliseconds (McCormick, 1992), these types of local
dendritic interactions give to corticothalamic feedback the potentiality to control the state of thalamic neurons within a few
milliseconds. Experimental measurement of the amount of synaptic conductance activated by corticothalamic feedback in the
dendrites of TC cells would be needed to test this hypothesis
further.

REFERENCES
Andersen P, Eccles JC (1962) Inhibitory phasing of neuronal discharge.
Nature 196:645– 647.
Andersen P, Rutjord T (1964) Simulation of a neuronal network operating rhythmically through recurrent inhibition. Nature 204:289 –190.
Bal T, von Krosigk M, McCormick DA (1995a) Synaptic and membrane
mechanisms underlying synchronized oscillations in the ferret LGNd in
vitro. J Physiol (L ond) 483:641– 663.
Bal T, von Krosigk M, McCormick DA (1995b) Role of the ferret perigeniculate nucleus in the generation of synchronized oscillations in
vitro. J Physiol (L ond) 483:665– 685.
Bloomfield SA, Hamos JE, Sherman SM (1987) Passive cable properties
and morphological correlates of neurones in the lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat. J Physiol (L ond) 383:653– 692.
Bush PC, Sejnowski TJ (1993) Reduced compartmental models of neocortical pyramidal cells. J Neurosci Methods 46:159 –166.
Contreras D, Curro
´ Dossi R, Steriade M (1993) Electrophysiological
properties of cat reticular thalamic neurones in vivo. J Physiol (Lond)
470:273–294.
Coulter DA, Huguenard JR, Prince DA (1989) C alcium currents in rat
thalamocortical relay neurones: kinetic properties of the transient,
low-threshold current. J Physiol (L ond) 414:587– 604.
Crunelli V, Leresche N, Paravelas J (1987) Membrane properties of
morphologically identified X and Y cells in the lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat in vitro. J Physiol (L ond) 390:243–256.
Descheˆnes M, Paradis M, Roy JP, Steriade M (1984) Electrophysiology
of neurons of lateral thalamic nuclei in cat: resting properties and burst
discharges. J Neurophysiol 55:1196 –1219.

3588 J. Neurosci., May 15, 1998, 18(10):3574–3588

Destexhe A, Sejnowski TJ (1997) Synchronized oscillations in thalamic
networks: insights from modeling studies. In: Thalamus (Steriade M,
Jones EG, McCormick DA, ed), pp 331–371. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Destexhe A, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ (1993) A model for 8 –10 Hz
spindling in interconnected thalamic relay and reticularis neurons.
Biophys J 65:2474 –2478.
Destexhe A, Bal T, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ (1996a) Ionic mechanisms underlying synchronized oscillations and propagating waves in
a model of ferret thalamic slices. J Neurophysiol 76:2049 –2070.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Steriade M, Sejnowski TJ, Huguenard JR
(1996b) In vivo, in vitro and computational analysis of dendritic calcium currents in thalamic reticular neurons. J Neurosci 16:169 –185.
Destexhe A, Contreras D, Steriade M (1998) Mechanisms underlying
the synchronizing action of corticothalamic feedback through inhibition
of thalamic relay cells. J Neurophysiol 79:999 –1016.
Erisir A, VanHorn SC, Bickford M E, Sherman SM (1997) Immunocytochemistry and distribution of parabrachial terminals in the lateral
geniculate nucleus of the cat: a comparison with corticogeniculate
terminals. J Comp Neurol 377:535–549.
Golomb D, Wang XJ, Rinzel J (1996) Propagation of spindle waves in a
thalamic slice model. J Neurophysiol 75:750 –769.
Hille B (1992) Ionic channels of excitable membranes. Sunderland, M A:
Sinauer.
Hines ML, Carnevale N T (1997) The N EURON simulation environment. Neural Comput 9:1179 –1209.
Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF (1952) A quantitative description of membrane
current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve.
J Physiol (Lond) 117:500 –544.
Huguenard JR (1998) Heterogeneity of LVA calcium currents in thalamic neurons and their f unctional role in burst firing. In: L ow voltage
activated T-type calcium channels (Tsien RW, Nargeot J, ed), pp
143–152. Chester, UK: Adis International.
Huguenard JR, McCormick DA (1992) Simulation of the currents involved in rhythmic oscillations in thalamic relay neurons. J Neurophysiol 68:1373–1383.
Huguenard JR, Prince DA (1992) A novel T-type current underlies
prolonged Ca 2ϩ-dependent bursts firing in GABAergic neurons of rat
thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurosci 12:3804 –3817.
Huguenard JR, Hamill OP, Prince DA (1988) Developmental changes in
Na ϩ conductances in rat neocortical neurons: appearance of a slowly
inactivating component. J Neurophysiol 59:778 –795.
Karst H, Joels M, Wadman WJ (1993) L ow-threshold calcium current in
dendrites of the adult rat hippocampus. Neurosci Lett 164:154 –158.
Jahnsen H, Llina´s RR (1984a) Electrophysiological properties of
guinea-pig thalamic neurons: an in vitro study. J Physiol (L ond)
349:205–226.
Jahnsen H, Llina´s RR (1984b) Ionic basis for the electroresponsiveness
and oscillatory properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurons in vitro.
J Physiol (Lond) 349:227–247.
Jones EG (1985) The thalamus. New York: Plenum.
Liu X B, Honda CN, Jones EG (1995) Distribution of four types of
synapse on physiologically identified relay neurons in the ventral posterior thalamic nucleus of the cat. J Comp Neurol 352:69 –91.
Magee JC, Johnston D (1995) Characterization of single voltage-gated
Na ϩ and Ca 2ϩ channels in apical dendrites of rat CA1 pyramidal
neurons. J Physiol (Lond) 487:67–90.

Destexhe et al. • Dendritic T-Current in Thalamic Relay Cells

McCormick DA (1992) Neurotransmitter actions in the thalamus and
cerebral cortex and their role in neuromodulation of thalamocortical
activity. Prog Neurobiol 39:337–388.
McCormick DA, Huguenard JR (1992) A model of the electrophysiological properties of thalamocortical relay neurons. J Neurophysiol
68:1384 –1400.
Mu
¨ller W, L ux H D (1993) Analysis of voltage-dependent membrane
currents in spatially extended neurons from point-clamp data. J Neurophysiol 69:241–247.
Munsch T, Budde T, Pape HC (1997) Voltage-activated intracellular
calcium transients in thalamic relay cells and interneurons. NeuroReport 11:2411–2418.
Neubig M, Destexhe A (1997) Construction of low-order computational
models which accommodate spatial distributions of afferent synapses
received by thalamocortical neurons. Soc Neurosci Abstr 23:573.
Ohara P T, Havton L A (1994) Dendritic architecture of rat somatosensory thalamocortical projection neurons. J Comp Neurol 341:159 –171.
Pape HC (1996) Queer current and pacemaker: the hyperpolarizationactivated cation current in neurons. Ann Rev Physiol 58:299 –327.
Perez Velazquez JL, C arlen PL (1996) Development of firing patterns
and electrical properties in neurons of the rat ventrobasal thalamus.
Dev Brain Res 91:164 –170.
Pirchio M, T urner JP, Williams SR, Asprodini E, Crunelli V (1997)
Postnatal development of membrane properties and delta oscillations in
thalamocortical neurons of the cat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus.
J Neurosci 17:5428 –5444.
Press W H, Flannery BP, Teukolsky SA, Vetterling W T (1986) Numerical recipes. The art of scientific computing. C ambridge, UK: Cambridge UP.
Rall W, Burke RE, Holmes W R, Jack JJ, Redman SJ, Segev I (1992)
Matching dendritic neuron models to experimental data. Physiol Rev
72:S159 – S186.
Steriade M, Descheˆnes M (1984) The thalamus as a neuronal oscillator.
Brain Res Rev 8:1– 63.
Steriade M, Descheˆnes M, Domich L, Mulle C (1985) Abolition of
spindle oscillations in thalamic neurons disconnected from nucleus
reticularis thalami. J Neurophysiol 54:1473–1497.
Steriade M, Jones EG, L lina´s RR (1990) Thalamic oscillations and signalling. New York: Wiley.
Traub RD, Miles R (1991) Neuronal networks of the hippocampus.
C ambridge, UK : C ambridge UP.
Ulrich D, Huguenard JR (1995) Purinergic inhibition of GABA and
glutamate release in the thalamus: implications for thalamic network
activity. Neuron 15:909 –918.
von Krosigk M, Bal T, McCormick, DA (1993) C ellular mechanisms of
a synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science 261:361–364.
Wang XJ, Golomb D, Rinzel J (1995) Emergent spindle oscillations and
intermittent burst firing in a thalamic model: specific neuronal mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:5577–5581.
Warren R A, Jones EG (1997) Maturation of neuronal form and function in a mouse thalamo-cortical circuit. J Neurosci 17:277–295.
Z hou Q, Godwin DW, O’Malley DM, Adams PR (1997) Visualisation of
calcium influx through channels that shape the burst and tonic firing
modes of thalamic relay cells. J Neurophysiol 77:2816 –2825.

