291

Journal of Physiology (1990). 431. pp. 291-318
lVith 14 figures
Printed in Great Britain

PROPERTIES OF A HYPERPOLARIZATION-ACTIVATED CATION
CURRENT AND ITS ROLE IN RHYTHMIC OSCILLATION IN
THALAMIC RELAY NEURONES

BY DAVID A. McCORMICK* AND HANS-CHRISTIAN PAPEt
From the * Section of Neuroanatomy, Yale University School of Medicine,
333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06510, USA and tAbt. Neurophysiologie,
Medizinische Fakultaet, Ruhr-Universitaet, D-4630 Bochum, FRG

(Received 3 April 1990)
SUMMARY

1. The physiological and functional features of time-dependent anomalous
rectification activated by hyperpolarization and the current which underlies it, Ih,
were examined in guinea-pig and cat thalamocortical relay neurones using in vitro
intracellular recording techniques in thalamic slices.
2. Hyperpolarization of the membrane from rest with a constant-current pulse
resulted in time-dependent rectification, expressed as a depolarizing sag of the
membrane potential back towards rest. Under voltage clamp conditions, hyperpolarizing steps to membrane potentials negative to approximately -60 mV were
associated with the activation of a slow inward current, Ih, which showed no
inactivation with time.
3. The activation curve of the conductance underlying Ih was obtained through
analysis of tail currents and ranged from -60 to -90 mV, with half-activation
occurring at -75 mV. The time course of activation of Ih was well fitted by a singleexponential function and was strongly voltage dependent, with time constants
ranging from greater than 1-2 s at threshold to an average of 229 ms at -95 mV.
The time course of de-activation was also described by a single-exponential function,
was voltage dependent, and the time constant ranged from an average of 1000 ms at
-80 mV to 347 ms at -55 mV.
4. Raising [K+]o from 2-5 to 7-5 mM enhanced, while decreasing [Na+]o from 153 to
26 mM reduced, the amplitude of Ih. In addition, reduction of [Na']. slowed the rate
of Ih activation. These results indicate that Ih is carried by both Na+ and K+ ions,
which is consistent with the extrapolated reversal potential of -43 mV. Replacement
of Cl- in the bathing medium with isethionate shifted the chloride equilibrium
potential positive by approximately 30-70 mV, evoked an inward shift of the holding
current at -50 mV, and resulted in a marked reduction of instantaneous currents as
well as Ih, suggesting a non-specific blocking action of impermeable anions.
5. Local (2-10 mm in micropipette) or bath (1-2 mM) applications of Cs' abolished
Ih over the whole voltage range tested (-60 to -110 mV), with no consistent effects
on instantaneous currents. Barium (1 mm, local; 0-3-0-5 mm, bath) evoked a steady
*

5X8399

Author for correspondence.
10-2

292

D. A. McCORMICK AND H.-C. PAPE

inward current, reduced the amplitude of instantaneous currents, and had only weak
suppressive effects onIh.
6. Block of lh with local application of Cs' resulted in a hyperpolarization of the
membrane from the resting level, a decrease in apparent membrane conductance,
and a block of the slow after-hyperpolarization that appears upon termination of
depolarizing membrane responses, indicating that 'h contributes substantially to the
resting and active membrane properties of thalamocortical relay neurones.
7. A sub-population of cat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus neurones generated
rhythmic high-frequency bursts of action potentials with an interburst frequency of
1-2 Hz. Intracellular recordings indicate that this activity results from the
interaction of the low-threshold Ca2" current It with the hyperpolarization-activated
cation current Ih* It is proposed that the presence and physiological characteristics
of Ih contribute substantially to the physiological properties of thalamic neurones
during periods of inattentiveness and slow-wave sleep.
INTRODUCTION

Thalamocortical relay neurones possess two basic modes of action potential
generation which vary according to the state of the animal: (1) single-spike firing
occurs during attentiveness and waking and (2) rhythmic burst firing occurs during
periods of inattentiveness and sleep (Steriade & Deschenes, 1984; Steriade & Llinas,
1988). Intracellular investigations both in vivo and in vitro have revealed that
these two modes of action potential generation depend upon both the intrinsic
electrophysiological properties of thalamic neurones and the interconnections of the
different subtypes of thalamic cells, especially between the y-aminobutyric acidcontaining neurones of the nucleus reticularis and the neurones located in individual
relay nuclei (Jahnsen & Llina's, 1984a, b; Steriade & Deschenes, 1984; Steriade &
Llina's, 1988). One of the prominent features of thalamic relay neurones is that upon
hyperpolarization of the membrane there appears strong time-dependent inward
rectification which moves the membrane potential back towards the normal resting
value (Crunelli, Kelly, Leresche & Pirchio, 1987 a; McCormick & Pape, 1988;
Lightowler, Hynd, Pollard & Crunelli, 1989). Since the membrane potential of
thalamic relay neurones that are rhythmically oscillating in vivo continuously
fluctuates within the voltage range in which this rectification is present (Steriade &
Deschenes, 1984), the underlying current may be of importance for shaping the
electrical behaviour of these neurones, although its ionic basis and voltage
dependence have not yet been characterized.
In many different types of electrically responsive cells, including heart cells, and
neurones in the sensory and sympathetic ganglia, spinal cord, brain stem, cerebellum,
hippocampus and cerebral cortex, hyperpolarization of the membrane results in a
depolarizing sag back towards rest (Hotson, Prince & Schwartzkroin, 1979; Halliwell
& Adams, 1982; Mayer & Westbrook, 1983; DiFrancesco, 1985; Crepel & PenitSoria, 1986; Spain, Schwindt & Crill, 1987; Bobker & Williams, 1989; Eng, Gordon,
Kocsis & Waxman, 1990; Tokimasa & Akasu, 1990). The current underlying this
phenomenon is carried by both Na+ and K+ ions, activates upon membrane
hyperpolarization (typically beyond -60 mV), and de-activates upon depolarization. In sino-atrial cells and Purkinje fibres of the heart, this type of current,

Ih IN

THALAMIC

NELURONES

293

termed If, appears to be important in determining the rate of action potential
generation (Noble, DiFrancesco & Denyer, 1989). In the central nervous system, in
contrast, the role of hyperpolarization-activated cation currents is less clear.
Potential roles in determining the resting membrane potential and modulating the
response to hyperpolarizing inputs have been suggested (Halliwell & Adams, 1982;
Spain et al. 1987). AIn additional possibility is that lh contributes to rhythmic cellular
oscillations (Alonso & Llinas, 1989). In particular, the recent demonstration of
endogenous oscillations in thalamocortical relay neurones maintained in vitro at
membrane potentials in which time-dependent anomalous rectification is prevalent
(Haby. Leresehe, Jassik-Gersehenfeld, Soltesz & Crunelli, 1988; McCormick &
Prince, 1988) suggests a possible important contribution of Ih to this type of
electrophysiological behaviour.
Here we describe some of the physiological characteristics of the current which
underlies this form of anomalous rectification and investigate its contribution to the
electrophysiological behaviour of thalamocortical relay cells.
METHODS

Thalamic slices were prepared from male or female guinea-pigs (200-300 g) or cats (four;
approximately 25 kg) as described previously (Crunelli, Leresche, Hynd, Patel & Parnavelas,
1987b: MIcCormick & Pape, 1988: McCormick & Prince, 1988). The animals were deeply
anaesthetized (pentobarbitone, 40 mg/kg i.P., guinea-pigs; ketamine, 25 mg/kg I.M., followed by
pentobarbitone. 36 mg/kg i.v., cats) and killed by decapitation. A block of tissue containing the
dorsolateral aspect of the thalamus was removed and placed in physiological saline at a
temperature of 5 'C. Slices were prepared as 400 ,um thick coronal sections on a Vibratome (Ted
Pella, Model 1000) and placed in an interface-type recording chamber (Fine Science Tools). Slices
were maintained at 36 + 1 'C and continuously superfused with a solution containing (in mM):
XaCl. 126; KCl, 2 5; MgSO4, 1 2-2; NaHCO3, 26; NaH2PO4, 1-25; CaCl2, 2; dextrose, 10; saturated
with 95% O2, 5% CO2 to a final pH of 7-4. Recording commenced 2 h after preparation of the
slices.
Intracellular recordings were obtained with thin-wall micropipettes (World Precision
Instruments, TW-100), prepared on a micropipette puller (Flaming-Brown, P-80/PC) and filled
with 4 m-potassium acetate. Final resistances ranged between 35 and 55 MQ.
An Axoclamp 2A amplifier (Axon Instruments) was used for both current and voltage clamp
recordings. I)uring current clamp recordings. the bridge balance was continuously monitored.
I)uring single-electrode voltage clamp, head stage output was continuously monitored to ensure
adequate settling time. Sampling frequencies were between 3-5 and 5-5 kHz and the amplifier gain
was typically around 1 nA/mV. Voltage clamp experiments were performed using the pClamp
software program (Axon Instruments) operating on an IBM AT computer. The degree of 'space
clamp' obtained in these neurones under our conditions is unknown. However, the finding that the
rate an(i voltage dependence of activation of I, were both well behaved, in that they were smooth
and continiuous functions of the membrane potential, suggests that sufficient clamp was obtained
in order to avoid serious errors. Data were digitized (Neurocorder DR-384) and stored on magnetic
tape with a video cassette recorder for later analysis or collected on-line with the computer. Only
neurones having stable membrane potentials negative to -55 mV, resting input resistances above
30 M1Q andl action potentials which overshot 0 mV were included for analysis. In the cat dorsal
lateral geniculate nucleus, recordings were obtained from neurones located in the A-laminae.
Changing the ionic composition of the bathing medium was achieved by the following equimolar
substitutions: (a) extracellular sodium concentration was decreased by replacing NaCl with choline
chloride; (b) extracellular potassium concentration was increased by substitution of KCl for NaCl;
and (c) extracellular chloride concentration was reduced by replacing NaCl by sodium isethionate,
and KCl by potassium acetate. DC offsets due to changes in junction potential at the Ag-AgCl
reference electrode in different chloride concentrations were compensated in the following way: the
membrane potential at which single-spike firing was elicited was determined in normal bathing

294

D. A. McCORMICK AND H. -C. PAPE

solution. During introduction of a different chloride solution, this firing threshold w as repeatedly
monitored and its reading was kept constant by adding current to the input offset circuitry of the
amplifier. Complete exchange, indicated by a constant reference potential, was typically achieved
in 30-60 min. At the end of the experiment, the change in reference potential was controlled by
measuring the DC offset of the electrode in normal bathing solution. Finally,. when In2" or Ba2"
were added to the superfusate, MgCl2 was substituted for MgSO4 and NaH2PO4 was removed to
avoid precipitation.
Caesium and barium were applied to thalamic neurones either in the bathing medium (Cs',
1-2 mM; Ba2, 500 ,M) or locally to the exposed surface of the slice with a broken micropipette (Cs+,
2-20 mM; Ba2+. 1 mM). Drug-applying micropipettes had a tip diameter of approximately 2-5 ,m
and substances were extruded in volumes of 5-15 pl by applying a brief pressure pulse of nitrogen
(10-20 ms, 207-345 kPa) to the pipette. In some experiments. Ni2" (1 mM). 4-aminopyridine (4-AP,
0 5-1 mM), tetraethylammonium (10 mM) or tetrodotoxin (TTX, 02 /AM) were introduced in the
perfusion medium. Averaged data are represented as mean + standard deviation.
RESULTS

The data presented here are based largely upon recordings obtained from neurones
in the guinea-pig dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (LGND; n = 67). Additional
recordings from cells in the LGND of the cat (n = 14), as well as from the medial
geniculate nucleus (n = 9) of both species, revealed similar results and therefore
were combined for analysis. A representative sample of twenty guinea-pig LGND
neurones possessed a resting membrane potential of -66 + 3 mV, apparent input
resistance of 46 + 12 MQ and spike amplitude of 91 + 6 mV. All neurones reported
here exhibited large rebound burst discharges upon repolarization of the membrane
after a brief hyperpolarization, strong inward rectification when hyperpolarized, and
delayed onset to firing when depolarized. These electrophysiological properties
suggest that these neurones were thalamocortical relay neurones (Jahnsen & Llinas,
1984a, b; McCormick & Pape, 1988) and therefore we refer to them as such.
Hyperpolarization of thalamic relay neurones beyond approximately -60 mV
resulted in a slowly activating rectification, apparent as a depolarizing sag of the
membrane potential back towards the normal resting value (Fig. 1A, arrows). Both
the amplitude of this rectification and the apparent rate of its activation increased
markedly with incremental increases in the hyperpolarizing current pulse (Fig. 1A).
In neurones located in other parts of the nervous system, termination of a
hyperpolarizing current pulse is often associated with the generation of a rebound
depolarizing potential, resulting in part from the slow de-activation of the current
underlying anomalous rectification (Mayer & Westbrook, 1983; Spain et al. 1987). In
thalamic relay cells, the membrane potential changes upon termination of a
hyperpolarizing response are complicated by the interacting effects of de-activation
of anomalous rectification with activation of other currents, such as the lowthreshold calcium current (Jahnsen & Llina's, 1984a, b; Coulter, Huguenard &
Prince, 1989; Crunelli, Lightowler & Pollard, 1989; Hernaindez-Cruz & Pape, 1989)
and transient potassium currents (Jahnsen & Llina's, 1984a, b; D. A. McCormick,

unpublished observations).
In single-electrode voltage clamp, hyperpolarizing voltage steps from a holding
potential of -55 mV resulted in a slow inward relaxation, the time course and
amplitude of which was dependent on the amplitude of the voltage step (Fig. 1B,
arrows). The injection of short duration conductance test pulses (50 ms duration,
10 mV amplitude) during the development of this inward relaxation revealed a

Ih IN THALAMIC NEURONES
A

Current clamp

B

295

Voltage clamp

It

0.5

-55

-55-

2s

20 mV
N

y1-1

-108

Fig. 1. Rectification of hyperpolarizing responses evoked in a guinea-pig LGND relay cell.
Upper traces are membrane current; lower traces are membrane potential. Recordings
are from the same cell, depolarized to -55 mV. A, in current clamp conditions hyperpolarizing current pulses (duration 19 s) evoke membrane hyperpolarizations that show
a voltage- and time-dependent depolarizing 'sag' (arrows). B, under voltage clamp
conditions, hyperpolarizing voltage steps elicit a slow inward current (Ih, arrows) whose
amplitude and rate of activation increase with increasing hyperpolarization.
A

B
1.0

0

_

0.8
x

j1 nA

VoV5 =-75 mV
S=5.5

e
s N

0

_

1\ ~~~~~~~~~8

2s

0.6

j

0.41

L-49
-90

0.2 1

C

0.0
-1 10 -100

-90

-80

-70

-60

Membrane potential (mV)

-50

200 pA

-40

2s

-901
Fig. 2. Activation curve of the conductance, Gh. which underlies Ih. A, plot of the
activation curve for Gh for seven different LGND relay neurones. Filled circles represent
data obtained from cell illustrated in B and C. Line represents best fit using eqn (1) for
data illustrated. B, incremental increases in hyperpolarizing steps from -40 to -90 mV
progressively increase the amount of Ih which is activated. Tail currents between arrows
are expanded for detail in C. Care was taken in measuring tail currents so as to minimize
the contribution of capacitative or non-Ih active currents by allowing sufficient time for
these events to dissipate before measuring Ih. See text for details.

D. A. McCORMICK AND H.-C. PAPE

296

substantial increase in membrane conductance (mean = 19-6 + 5 7 nS; n = 5; -55 to
-95 mV), indicating that it represented the activation of an inward current, rather
than de-activation of an outward current.
In the following we will refer to this slow inward current as Ih because it is
activated by hyperpolarization. In agreement with the results in current clamp, the
amplitude of Ih increased markedly with increases in the size of the hyperpolarizing
voltage step (Fig. IB). The threshold for activation of Ih appeared to be
approximately -60 to -65 mV and at -95 mV the amplitude of 'h ranged from 0 5
to 2-0 nA (e.g. Figs 1-3). The current did not decay during voltage steps longer than
1 min in duration, indicating very little, if any, inactivation of the conductance
underlying Ih.
Activation curve
The activation curve of the membrane conductance underlying Ih (Gh) was
constructed by measuring tail currents elicited by repolarizing the membrane to
holding level (typically -60 mV) following voltage steps of 4-5 s to between -55
and - 105 mV (Fig. 2). This experimental protocol was chosen to reduce
contamination of Ih tail currents by other currents, the possible contribution of
which was further minimized in some neurones by including Ni2+ (1 mM) to block
low-threshold calcium currents (Coulter et al. 1989; Crunelli et al. 1989; HernandezCruz & Pape, 1989), 4-aminopyridine (0-5-1 mM) to block transient potassium
outward currents (such as IA and ID, Storm, 1988), and tetrodotoxin (TTX, 0 2 JLM)
to block transient and persistent voltage-gated sodium currents and spontaneous
synaptic potentials. The tail current amplitudes were normalized to the maximal
amplitude and plotted against the membrane potential to which the neurone was
stepped during activation of 'h. The resulting data were well fitted by the Boltzmann
equation:

I/Imax= (1

+exp ((Vm

VO.5)/S))

(1)

were Vm is the membrane potential, V'O5 is the membrane potential at which Gh is halfactivated, I is the amplitude of the tail current at the beginning of Ih de-activation
and s is the slope factor which determines the steepness of the fitted curve (e.g. Mayer
& Westbrook, 1983; Hagiwara & Irisawa, 1989).
In this manner, the activation range of Gh was between -60 and -95 mV, with
half-activation occurring at an average of - 74-6 + 3 4 mV (n = 7) with a slope factor
(s) of 5-5+08 (Fig. 2A).

Time course of activation and de-activation
The rate of activation of Ih increased markedly as the membrane potential was
hyperpolarized (Figs lB and 3). Over the whole voltage range tested, 'h was well
Fig. 3. Time constants of 'h activation and de-activation. A, plot of the voltage
dependence of Ih activation and de-activation as calculated from the data presented in
B-E. Progressive hyperpolarizing voltage steps activate lh (B). The current traces during
the 3 s interval indicated are expanded in D in which the data are fitted with a singleexponential function (circles represent actual data; line is best fit). Voltage dependence of
Ih de-activation was examined by fully activating Ih and then stepping to membrane
potentials between -83 and -55 mV (C). The current traces during the 3 s interval
indicated were fitted with a single-exponential function (E). Data obtained after block of
transient outward current with 4-aminopyridine and voltage-activated Na+ currents with
tetrodotoxin.

Ih IN THALAMIC NEURONES

297

c

Lfl

6

c

CY
l0

111}1111

C

.2
4-

4L)
a)

X

Lfl

U
X

,l

o

4
It

4-

C._

<

a

:

c

G

LUJ

c

0

C

0

0

1~~~~~~
0

0
0

'/

0

o,
0)

aC)

0'

0I

0

0'
C

0

0

C.)

o
o
O

0
0
LO

0
0
0

E

0
0
LO

0

=a=)

298

D. A. MUcCORMICK AND H. -C PAPE

fitted (r > 0 98) by a single-exponential function of the form:
It =Ao+Aletl,
(2)
where It is the amplitude of the current at time t. Ao and A, are constants and T is
the time constant (Fig. 3D). T ranged from greater than 1-2 s at membrane
potentials just past threshold (e.g. -65 to -70 mV) to an average of 229 ms
(± 57 ms; n = 7) at -95 to -100 mV (Fig. 3A).
The rate of de-activation of lh was determined through examining tail currents
associated with depolarization of the membrane from a hyperpolarized level (e.g.
- 105 mV) or through envelope analysis. When examining tail currents, the
transient outward potassium currents were typically blocked with local application
of 4-aminopyridine (1-2 mM; n = 5) after block of synaptic transmission with local
application of tetrodotoxin (10 ALM). The amplitude and time course of 'h during deactivation was well fitted (r > 095) by a single-exponential function (Fig. 3E). The
rate of de-activation of Ih was strongly voltage dependent (Fig. 3A) ranging from
> 1 s at approximately -85 mV to an average of 347 ms (± 97; n = 5) at -55 mV.
The latter value of de-activation of 'h was confirmed through the use of envelope
analysis (Mayer & Westbrook, 1983; Tokimasa & Akasu, 1990). In this protocol, the
membrane potential was held at -95 mV for a sufficient time to fully activate Ih (e.g.
5 s) and was then transiently depolarized to between -60 and -55 mV for a varying
length of time. The membrane was then repolarized to -95 mV and the amplitude
of Ih activated by this repolarization was measured. Due to the lack of inactivation
of 'h, this amplitude corresponds to the amount of 'h which de-activated during the
transient depolarization. Using this experimental protocol, we determined the rate
of de-activation of Ih to average 426 + 121 ms (n = 6) at -60 to -55 mV, a value
which is in good agreement with the time constants obtained through analysis of tail
currents.
Ionic composition of Ih
The nature of the ions carrying 'h through the membrane was investigated by
changing the extracellular concentration of K+, Na+ and Cl-. Raising the
extracellular K+ concentration ([K+]0) from 25 to 75 mm resulted in an inward
current, an increase in membrane conductance, and an enhancement of 'h, as
measured by the difference between the steady-state and instantaneous I-V relations
(Fig. 4A and B; n = 4). Possible contamination of the steady-state currents by the
K+-carried inward rectifier, which at physiological intracellular magnesium concentrations is activated by hyperpolarization beyond the potassium equilibrium
potential, EK (Matsuda, Saigusa & Irisawa, 1987; Ishihara, Mitsuiye, Noma &
Takano, 1989), can be assumed to be small, since the range of hyperpolarizing
voltage pulses was largely positive to EK (presumably - 105 and -73 mV in 2-5 and
7 5 mM [K+]O, respectively; McCormick & Prince, 1987). These data indicate that a
significant portion of lh is carried by K+.
Decreasing [Na']. from 153 to 26 mm resulted in a marked reduction of the
amplitude of the hyperpolarization-activated steady-state current and a slower time
course of activation at a given voltage (Fig. 5A; n = 6). In addition, the deactivating currents, emerging as tail currents after stepping back to the holding

Ih IN THALAMIC NEUTRONES

299

A

2-5

75

[K+]0 (mM) 2-5

-57

-54

-52
-84

-85

40 mV
600 ms

B

0~~~
-10

A

A

I(nA)

*

25mM

-2.0/
A

/S

-3.0

/7.5 mM
-4.0

A

90

-80

-70

-60

-50

V(mV)
Fig. 4. Effects of changing the extracellular concentration of potassium ions, [K+]0, upon
hyperpolarization-activated currents. A, family of currents (upper traces) evoked in a
LGND neurone by hyperpolarizing voltage steps (lower traces) in control solution
(2-5 mm [K+]O, left), during increased [K+]o (7-5 mm, middle; dashed line for comparison
in baseline holding current), and during recovery to control [K+]. (2-5 mm, right). Holding
potential and most negative steady-state step potential are indicated near traces; step
amplitude is 5 mV, step duration is 2 s. B, I-V relationship for instantaneous currents (Ii,
circles) and steady-state currents after 2 s (I,, triangles) obtained from experiment in A.
Open symbols indicate control condition; filled symbols indicate elevated [K+]0. Ii at
larger hyperpolarizations extrapolated (dashed line) from instantaneous I-V relationships
at smaller hyperpolarizations, that were directly determined from measurement of current
traces. Tail currents are contaminated by transient Ca2+ and K+ currents. Note increased
slope of the steady-state I-V relation during increased [K+]o that exceeds increase in slope
of the instantaneous I-V relationship.

potential of -50 mV, changed from small inward to clear outward currents in the
low-Na+ solution, indicating a negative shift of the reversal potential. Current versus
voltage (I-V) relationships revealed a negative shift of the steady-state I-V relation
in low Na+, and no significant change in instantaneous current (Fig. 5C). These
results indicate that Na+ ions also contribute to Ih*
A possible contribution of Cl- to Ih was examined by decreasing [Cl-] from 132-5
to 4 mm using isethionate. The low-Cl- solution shifted Ecl, which normally is
approximately -75 mV, by up to 70 mV more positive, as indicated by the reversal
potential of the muscimol- (0 I mm, local application) induced chloride current. If a

D. A. McCORMICK AND H. -C. PAPE

300

large anion conductance contributed to Ih, this positive shift of Ec1 is expected to
increase Ih in size. However, the low-Cl- solution resulted in a substantial decrease
in size of both the steady-state currents and the instantaneous currents activated by
hyperpolarizing voltage steps, and in addition elicited an inward shift of the holding
A

[Na+lo (mM)

-50

153

26

153

-52

lss

-5 1

-98

-96

''A__

-,___

_,__

2 nA

jj 40 mV

600 ms
B

+0-5-

*0/

00-

-0-5 /j

0

~

/'
A

0

Az
/(nA)

26mm
A

'

-2.0

/SS

-2-5

,/153 mM
-100

-90

-80

-70
V(mV)

-60

-50

Fig. 5. Effects of changing the extracellular concentration of sodium ions, [Na+]., upon Ih.
A, family of currents (upper traces) evoked by hyperpolarizing voltage steps (lower
traces) in control solution (153 mm [Na']., left), during reduced [Na']. (26 mm, middle),
and during recovery to control [Na+]O (153 mm, right). Pulse protocol as in Fig. 4. Note
the reduced size and time course of activation in the steady-state currents, and the change
in polarity of the de-activating tail currents in the low-Na+ solution. B, I-V relationship
obtained from data in A, with instantaneous currents (Ii) plotted as circles and steadystate currents (ISS) plotted as triangles; open symbols represent control conditions and
filled symbols reduced [Na+]O. Recordings in the same LGND neurone.

current at a potential of -50 mV (Fig. 6A and B; n = 3). Thus, the amplitude of Ih
was significantly reduced in the low-Cl- solution, suggesting a blocking action of
isethionate ions on Ih. Interestingly, the time course of activation of Ih appeared
unchanged during substitution of [Cl-]O. Similar blocking effects of impermeable
anion substitutes on anomalous rectifier currents have been reported in sino-atrial
node cells (Yanagihara & Irisawa, 1980) and sensory ganglion neurones (Mayer &

Westbrook, 1983).

301

Ih IN THALAMIC NEURONES
A

4

[Cil-0 (mM) 1325

1325

_

0

53

L

S

-54

53

-

=

-101

-101

-103

-103

2 nA

-103 4OmV
600

ms

B
+1 0

a

a

-7@

+0 5

A

-30
-0.5

-.

A

--.

"A

-1.0

-A
4 mmA
AX

/(nA)
-1.5

-10
-2.0

~O

-10

-0

80

-7

6

5

A

V (mv)

Fig. 6. Effects of changing the extracellular concentration of chloride ions, [CI-]., upon Ih.
A, family of currents (upper traces) elicited by hyperpolarizing voltage commands (lower
traces) in a single LGND neurone in control solution (132m5 mm [CI-]M, left), during
substitution of chloride ions by isethionate ions (4 mm [C,-]., middle; dashed line for
comparison in baseline holding current), and during recovery in control solution (right).
Pulse protocol as in Fig. 4. B, I-V relationship from experiment in A. Open symbols,
control; filled symbols, reduced [CL-]0. Low-Cl- solution substantially reduces Ih, i.e. the
difference between instantaneous currents (IA) and steady-state currents (I8.).

We conclude that both Na+ and K+ ions carry the hyperpolarization-activated
current, Ih, in thalamic neurones, and suggest that Cl- ions do not contribute
substantially to this inwardly rectifying process.

Sen8itivity of Ih to extracellular Cs+ and Ba2+
In many different cell types low concentrations of extracellular caesium ions (Cs'),
but not barium ions (Ba2+), selectively block hyperpolarization-activated cation
currents (Halliwell & Adams, 1982; Mayer & Westbrook, 1983; DiFrancesco, 1985;

., . _ ._,.t\_'.sEw_2,t.-v*.s\_

D. A. McCORMICK AND H. -C. PAPE

302

Spain et al. 1987). In thalamocortical neurones, local (2-10 mM) or bath (1-2 mM)
application of Cs+ resulted in a selective reduction of Ih (Fig. 7A and B; n = 12). In
contrast, Cs+ appeared to have no consistent effect on the instantaneous components
of the current responses (Fig. 7A and B).
A

S ___
C+~

(-rntrn

Recovery

_

r . . . . .* .-

_

o

_*_._ .. ._-_ _8_._. _X.__

_

r,, >s

.s>

>><.- =-

.

1 nA

71

2s
=7:

_ _

7..1

B

o.o[

_

i.

-0.5 I
/ (OA)

Cs+

/ss

A

A

Control

A~

-1 5
A

I/

./9n
-110

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

V(mV)

Fig. 7. Extracellular caesium blocks Ih, A, family of currents (upper traces) evoked by
hyperpolarizing voltage steps (lower traces) under control conditions (left), after local
application of caesium (Cs', 10 mm in micropipette; middle), and after recovery from Cs'
(right). Holding potential and most negative step potential are indicated near traces; step
amplitude is 5 mV; step duration is 2 s. B, I-V relationship obtained from experiment in
A. Instantaneous current (I,) is plotted as circles; steady-state current (ISS) after 2 s is
plotted as triangles. Open symbols represent currents under control condition; filled
symbols are currents after application of Cs'. Cs' blocks the time- and voltage-dependent
inward current with no effect on instantaneous current.

In current clamp recordings, local or bath applications of Cs' resulted in a
complete or near-complete block of the depolarizing 'sag' activated by hyperpolarization (e.g. Fig. 13A), confirming that this feature of electroresponsiveness is
due to activation of Ih'

IN THALAMIC NEURONES

h

Ba2+

Control

A
-56 7_!

Recovery

%4E11:2OmV

TF

MCh

MCh

303

20 s

MCh

MCh

B

,

~~ ~

~

~

~

~

-_-

~

--.-

r~~~~~~~~~~~~.,..__.

---

,.iLJ

....-f

4

<

:~~~~~1
nA

5.

-

Issj

-54
l_

2

s

,--

f

1

lj

mA

p-i

-106
C 1

0

-

1-

Ba2+
/ss

-2 [

-3

-100

-90

-80

-70

-60

-50

V(mV)

Fig. 8. Extracellular barium does not block I'. A, hyperpolarizing-depolarizing response
elicited by local application of the muscarinic-specific agonist acetyl-,-methylcholine
(MCh, 5 mM), due to increase and decrease of membrane potassium conductances
(McCormick & Prince. 1987). The hyperpolarizing response is reversibly antagonized by
local application of Ba2+ (1 mM). B, same cell as in A. Inward currents (upper traces)
elicited by stepping from a holding potential of -54 mV to -106 mV in increments of
5 mV (lower traces). Ba2' evokes a small steady inward current (indicated by dashed line)
and reduction in instantaneous current (Ii), but has very little, if any, effect on I,
(difference between ISS and Ii). C, I-V relationship obtained from experiment in B.
Open symbols represent control currents; filled symbols are currents during Ba2".
Instantaneous current (I. circles) is slightly reduced by Ba2+. whereas the steady-state
current (<S triangles) is relatively unaffected.

304

D. A. McCORMICK AND H. -C PAPE

Extracellular application of Ba2+ either locally (1 mM) or in the bath (300-500 JLM)
to relay neurones held near firing threshold resulted in a small inward current, a
reduction of instantaneous currents evoked by hyperpolarizing voltage pulses from
about -50 mV, and only mild suppressive effects on lh (Fig. 8B and C; n = 4).
In current clamp recordings, Ba2+ resulted in depolarization of the membrane, a
decrease in apparent input conductance, and a potent and reversible block of the
hyperpolarizing response elicited by the muscarinic agonist acetyl-,/-methylcholine
(5 mm, local application; Fig. 8A), known to be due to an increase in membrane
potassium conductance (McCormick & Prince, 1987). In contrast, Ba2+ had no
consistent effect on the depolarizing 'sag' activated by hyperpolarization (not shown).

Reversal potential
Determination of the reversal potential of Ih was achieved through two different
methods. First, under voltage clamp conditions, the membrane potential was
stepped from approximately -95 mV to potentials varying from -75 to -35 mV
and the magnitude and polarity of the emerging tail currents during de-activation
of Ih were measured. To minimize contamination of Ih tails by other currents, the
cells were exposed to a number of channel blockers including Ni2+ (0-5 mM),
4-aminopyridine (0 5-1 mM), tetraethylammonium (10 mM), Ba2+ (1 mM) and tetrodotoxin (0-2 aM). In this manner, Ih tail currents reversed from inward to outward
at approximately -43 +6 mV (n = 3).
To corroborate this reversal potential, a second method was used which takes
advantage of the finding that Ih is selectively and potently blocked by local
application of Cs+ (see above). The neurone was voltage clamped well into the
activation range of Ih (e.g. -90 mV) and voltage steps to varying potentials were
applied (Fig. 9A). The instantaneous current at the beginning of each voltage step
was determined, and a I-V relationship was constructed (Fig. 9B). Next, Ih was
blocked through local application of Cs+ (5-10 mM) and instantaneous I-V
relationships were again determined. The extrapolated meeting point of the
instantaneous I-V curves with and without contribution of Ih corresponds to the
reversal potential of Ih. In this manner, the reversal potential was determined to be
-43 + 9 mV (n = 8), in agreement with the tail current analysis method above.
Functional properties of Ih
The ability of extracellular Cs+ to selectively block 'h was used to investigate the
contribution of 'h to the electrophysiological behaviour of thalamic neurones. Using
this protocol, we have found 'h to contribute to three different electrophysiological
characteristics of thalamic neurones: determination of the resting membrane
potential, the occurrence of rhythmic burst firing, and the appearance of an afterhyperpolarization after removal of a depolarization.
Contribution of lh to resting membrane potential
The resting membrane potential of thalamocortical relay neurones ranges from
-62 to -75 mV which is within the activation range of Ih (see Fig. 2). Therefore, Ih
may contribute significantly to the resting membrane properties of these neurones.

Ih IN THALAMIC NEURONES

305

Indeed in current clamp recordings we found that local application of Cs' (5-20 mM;
n = 14) while the cell was at rest resulted in a hyperpolarization of 5-10 mV (Figs
11-13) and a substantial increase in the amplitude of electrotonic responses induced
by a hyperpolarizing current pulse (see Fig. IOA in McCormick & Pape, 1990).
A

B

Cell 1

1.0
-5
0.5

1 nA

20 s

Cs'

0V

-005

-70

-89

V / (nA)
~~-99~

Cell 2

A-1.5
-2.0/

Cs'
-86
-

--67
-

-95

-25Control!/
'/Control
~~~~~~~~-3.0
-100 -90 -80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20
V (MV)
inward
and
current relaxations
outward
A,

Fig. 9. Extrapolated reversal potential of I,*
(upper traces) upon hyperpolarizing and depolarizing voltage steps (lower traces) from
two LGND cells, held at - 89 mV (cell 1) and - 86 mV (cell 2). Indicated near the voltage

traces are the holding potential, the most positive and most negative step potentials. Step
amplitude is 5 mV; step duration is 2 s. The slow inward and outward relaxations
following the instantaneous currents represent activation and de-activation of Ih,
respectively. Local application of caesium (Cs', 10 mM) results in a steady outward
current and strongly reduced current relaxations, due to block of Ih, B, instantaneous I-V
relationships obtained from the experiments shown in A. Cell 1 is plotted as circles, cell
2 as triangles. Open symbols represent instantaneous currents obtained under control
conditions; filled symbols are instantaneous currents during Cs+. Extrapolated
intersection of instantaneous I-V curves with (control) and without (Cs+) contribution of
Ihoccurs at the reversal potential of Ih' Curves fitted by eye. See text for further details.

In voltage clamp, these local applications of Cs+ were associated with a selective
and readily reversible reduction of Ih (see Fig. 7). These results indicate that
ih contributes substantially to determining the resting membrane potential of
thalamocortical relay neurones.

Contribution of 'h to rhythmic burst firing
Extracellular recordings in cat LGND (but not guinea-pig LGND) revealed that a
sub-population of thalamic relay neurones spontaneously and rhythmically generates
high-frequency (300-500 Hz) bursts of two to six action potentials with an interburst
frequency of 1-2 Hz (Haby et al. 1988; McCormick & Prince, 1988). Intracellular
recordings from oscillating cat LGND neurones revealed that the slow 1-2 Hz
oscillation is characterized by the regular occurrence of low-threshold Ca2" spikes

D. A. McCORMICK AND H. -C PAPE
(Fig. 10) which appear to be separated by an after-hyperpolarization (AHP). The
oscillation was not dependent upon the occurrence of fast Na'-K+ action potentials,
since at certain membrane potentials, the rhythmic low-threshold Ca2" spikes were
subthreshold for the generation of these fast spikes (not shown). Depolarization or
306

A

Control

0105 nA

20 mV

200 ms
B

Tetrodotoxin

-58

-83

-84

/

-78

Fig. 10. Voltage dependence of 1-2 Hz oscillation in a cat LGND relay neurone. A, at
membrane potentials between -93 and -83 mV, no oscillation or synaptic activity is
seen. Slight depolarization of the neurone above -83 mrn elicits a burst which is followed
by rhythmic burst generation (see expanded traces). Further depolarization above
approximately -75 mV abolishes rhythmic activity. B, local application of tetrodotoxin
(10 /tM) completely blocks fast action potentials and synaptic activitv, but does not
abolish rhythmic occurrence of low-threshold Ca2+ spikes. Both recordings from a cat
LGND neurone.

hyperpolarization of the membrane through current injection revealed a small range
of membrane potentials between approximately -85 and -70 mV at which this
type of rhythmic activity can occur, and a relative lack of membrane or synaptic
events which might be triggering the 1-2 Hz bursting. These data suggest that the
rhythmic burst activity is an intrinsic property of the thalamocortical relay cell that

h
A

.ll III III

..

307
4

3

2

1
-1

IN THALAMIC NEURONES

-1

TWIIT9177-

-771

/ Cs'

L-1-1111u. Lill LLL1 ILL I-L.L-LLI LL 1A.-I

' I'l l 'I .] I'l [. .:

'TIT-r]7rrMTTrTTIlTrIU'I'I'T'l-l'I f'r

\

3

vft#j' fl wfti

SPSWAO-4

5s
4

50 ms
B
*

1

3

2

-77

20 mV

A.a,.v

tt

1

Cs'

I 22

CII
Cs+

i1

3

10 s

20 mV

50

ms

Fig. 1. Caesium enhances and blocks rhythmic burst firing in cat LGND neurones. A,
extracellular recording of a spontaneously active LGND neurone. A single application of
Cs+ enhances rhythmic activity from the rhythmic generation of a single spike (Al) to
rhythmic occurrence of bursts of eight action potentials (A2). Further applications of Cs+
initially slows the rate at which bursts occur and finally abolishes all activity. Spontaneous
activity slowly reappears with strong rhythmic bursts (A3) which gradually lessen back
to single action potentials (A4). B, intracellular recording from a cat LGND neurone at
-77 mV. Intracellular injection of a short duration (3 ms) depolarizing current pulse
triggers a low-threshold Ca2+ spike and a single fast action potential, followed by a small
AHP (Bi). Application of Cs+ results in a hyperpolarization and an enhancement of the
burst, which now contains six fast action potentials. As the hyperpolarization lessens,
rhythmic 1-2 Hz bursting activity can be triggered by the current pulse (asterisk).
Further applications of Cs+ can reversibly block this spontaneous activity.

only occur at membrane potentials where both the low-threshold Ca2" current is
available for activation (Jahnsen & Llina's, 1984a, b) and 'h is prevalent. The
endogenous nature of this activity was confirmed by the finding that local
application of tetrodotoxin (10 gM) completely blocked fast action potentials and
synaptic activity, but did not abolish the rhythmic oscillation (Fig. lOB). In
addition, simultaneous extracellular recordings from two oscillating neurones with
the same electrode revealed that each neurone exhibited its own particular frequency
can

D. A. McCORMICK AND H.-C. PAPE
308
of oscillation which was slightly different from that of its neighbour (n = 6). Thus,
the oscillatory activity in the two cells slowly drifted into and out of phase, as would
be expected by two independent oscillators (not shown).
The presence of rhythmic oscillation only at membrane potentials within the range
of Ih activation suggests an important contribution of this current. This hypothesis
Control

A

Cs'

1

Recovery

2

3

Il

I

lIl

|1 nA

*

-83

1AHPCs/25
B

+ DC

l

t

20 mV

3

1

AHP

J 20 mV
100 ms

Fig. 12. Local application of Cs+ blocks the burst after-hyperpolarization (AHP). A,
intracellular injection of a short duration (3 ms) depolarizing current pulse into a cat
LGND neurone at -83 mV results in a burst of six action potentials, followed by an AHP
(A1 and Bi), which can occasionally trigger rhythmic activity (asterisk). Local application
of Cs+ (10 mM) results in a hyperpolarization of the membrane potential and a reduction
in the amplitude of the AHP. Compensation for the hyperpolarization with intracellular
injection of current (+ DC) reveals that the AHP is greatly reduced or abolished (A2 and

B2). This effect is reversible (A3 and B3).
was tested through the selective block of 'h with local application of Cs+ (5-10 mm).
Interestingly, local application of Cs+ to spontaneously oscillating neurones resulted
in two effects, depending upon the dose administered. With small applications (e.g.
one 10-15 pl microdrop placed on the surface of the slice within 50 ,m of the entry
point of the recording electrode), the rhythmic burst firing was markedly enhanced
in that the number of spikes generated per burst was increased (Fig. 11, compare A 1
and A2; n = 11). Further applications of Cs+ resulted in further increases in the
number of spikes per burst as well as a lengthening of the interburst interval which
was generally followed by a complete and reversible cessation of activity (Fig. 1 lA).
These results suggest that this pattern of rhythmic burst activity is strongly
influenced by the presence and amplitude of Ih.
Intracellular recordings revealed that local application of small amounts of Cs+
enhanced the probability of obtaining rhythmic burst firing (n = 6) while larger
doses blocked this activity. For example, in the cell illustrated in Fig. 1 IB, injection
of a short duration (3 ms) depolarizing current pulse activated a low-threshold Ca2+
spike and one fast action potential, but no oscillatory activity (Fig. IlBI). Local

Ih IN THALAMIC NEURONES

309

application of Cs+ resulted in hyperpolarization of the membrane. As this lessened
1-2 Hz rhythmic burst firing appeared, each phase of which was associated with
a low-threshold Ca2+ spike which generated a burst of fast action potentials and
a pronounced AHP (Fig. 1lB2). Further applications of Cs+ could disrupt this
oscillation and replace it with a hyperpolarization. During repolarization, the
rhythmic activity either spontaneously reappeared, or could be triggered by a single
short depolarizing current pulse (Fig. 11B3).
These data suggest that the presence and characteristics of 1-2 Hz oscillation are
strongly influenced by the presence and amplitude of Ih. One possible mechanism
by which Ih may contribute to rhythmic burst firing is through the generation of a
hyperpolarization following each burst. Indeed, generation of a single low-threshold
Ca2+ spike was followed by the occurrence of a pronounced after-hyperpolarization
(AHP; Fig. 12A and B), which could result in the occurrence of a brief period of
rhythmic oscillation (Fig. 12A, asterisk). Application of small amounts of Cs+
resulted in hyperpolarization of the membrane and a reduction in the AHP even
though the burst response was enhanced. Compensation for the membrane
hyperpolarization with intracellular injection of current revealed the burst AHP to
be strongly reduced or abolished (Fig. 12A2 and B2). These results suggest that
the burst AHP is generated by the de-activation of Ih during the burst and the
subsequent activation of Ih after the burst. This hypothesis gives rise to a number
of predictions. First, the AHP should not depend upon the occurrence of a lowthreshold Ca2+ spike or fast action potentials, but rather should be present even after
a passive depolarization. Second, the amplitude of the AHP should increase with
increases in the duration of the depolarization. Third, the membrane conductance of
the cell should increase as the AHP lessens, and fourth, the AHP should not occur
at membrane potentials positive to the activation range of Ih.
All of these predictions were confirmed with intracellular recordings. Removal of
a tonic depolarization which does not generate either a low-threshold Ca2+ spike or
fast-action Na+-K+ action potentials is associated with the generation of an apparent
slow AHP (Fig. 13A and Al). This apparent AHP increases in amplitude with
increases in duration of the depolarization (Fig. 13B), and the rising phase of the
AHP could activate a low-threshold Ca21 spike (Fig. 13B). This ability of the slow
AHP to activate a low-threshold Ca2+ spike only occurs at membrane potentials
around -75 mV (Fig. 13 C) and the slow AHP all but disappears if the neurone is
tonically depolarized above -60 mV, even if a large number of action potentials are
generated (Fig. 13C). In addition, injection of conductance test pulses during the
generation of the slow AHP reveals that the membrane conductance is lowest at the
peak of the hyperpolarization and slowly increases until the membrane potential
once again stabilizes at the resting membrane potential (not shown). These
properties suggest that this hyperpolarizing 'overshoot' is due to repolarization of
the membrane through leakage channels which then shifts the membrane potential
into a range in which Ih is active. Activation of Ih subsequently results in a steady
depolarization which is both smooth and slow in time course. In this manner, the
initial hyperpolarizing and subsequent depolarizing phase of the apparent afterhyperpolarization are due to a decreased and increased level of Ih activation,
respectively.

D. A. McCORMICK AND H. -C. PAPE

310

,LmH LJ<L0SH
2

1

3

20 mV
-72

+0DC

AHP

/Cs+

B

5

C

a b

c

d
;
459

-72

7

-74~~~8

0.5 s

Fig. 13. Contribution of I,, to the resting potential and to the after-hyperpolarization
(AHP). A, depolarization from normal resting potential (-72 mV) by intracellular
injection of a current pulse, which does not result in a low-threshold Ca2" spike or the
generation of action potentials, is followed by a substantial after-hyperpolarization (trace
expanded in A 1). Local application of Cs' (20 mm in micropipette) results in a substantial
hyperpolarization of the membrane, that de-inactivates the low-threshold Ca2" spike,
thereby activating a burst of fast action potentials (A2). Compensation for the
hyperpolarization with the intracellular injection of current (+ DC) reveals that the AHP
is nearly abolished (compare Al and A3). B, increasing the duration of the depolarizing
current pulse results in a progressively larger AHP (arrows), that could generate a
rebound low-threshold Ca2+ spike (c and d). C, voltage dependence of the AHP. A
prolonged train of action potentials, elicited by a current pulse at -59 mV, is followed by
only a short duration AHP. Hyperpolarization of the neurone to -74 mV results in the
appearance of large AHP (arrow) even though the current pulse now causes only four
action potentials. At this membrane potential, the AHP is associated with the generation
of a rebound Ca2+ spike. Further hyperpolarization of the membrane to -82 mV abolishes
the ability of the AHP to trigger a Ca2+ spike. All data collected from the same cat LGND
layer A relay neurone. Spike amplitudes are truncated. Current calibration in A for A-C;
voltage calibration in A3 to A 1-A3, B and C. Time calibration in B for B and C.

These results indicate that 'h contributes substantially to the determination of
the resting membrane potential, the generation of a slow after-hyperpolarization
following a depolarization, and the occurrence of slow 1-2 Hz rhythmic burst firing
(Fig. 14B). In this manner, thalamocortical relay cells display two firing modes. In

'h IN THALAMIC NELTRONES
A

Oscillatory mode

Tonic mode

311
Oscillatory mode
|2 nA

20 mV

7-gglX,l,
2

B

Na+-K+
action
potentials

s

C

/h

Eh--

it

acactivate
-65---h

de-activate

/\It
inactivate

20 mV

activt7
250

ms

Removal
/t inactivation

Fig. 14. Two different firing modes of thalamic relay neurones and the proposed ionic
substrate of rhythmic burst firing. A, this cat LGND neurone generated rhythmic burst
firing at a rate of about 2 Hz. Depolarization of the cell to -58 mV with the intracellular
injectioin of currenit (top trace) halted the rhythmic activity and switched the neurone
to the tonic, or single-spike, mode of action potential generation. Removal of the
depolarization reinstated the oscillatory activity. B, expanded trace of oscillatory activity
and the proposed currents which largely mediate it. Activation of the low-threshold
calcium current, It, depolarizes the membrane towards threshold for a burst of Na'- and
K+-dependent fast action potentials. The depolarization de-activates the portion of I'
that was active immediately before the Ca2+ spike. Repolarization of the membrane due
to It inactivation is followed by a hyperpolarizing overshoot, due to the reduced
depolarizing effect of Ih. The hyperpolarization in turn de-inactivates It and activates lh,
which depolarizes the membrane towards threshold for another Ca2+ spike. C, expanded
trace of single-spike activity.

the lack of synaptic inputs, these neurones may exhibit endogenous rhythmic burst
firing (Fig. 14A). We suggest that this rhythmic burst firing arises largely from the
interaction of two dominant currents, It and lh (see Discussion). Upon tonic
depolarization of the membrane, as occurs for example during awakening from sleep
(Hirsch, Fourment & Marc, 1983), this rhythmic activity is abolished by moving the
membrane potential out of the range in which It and lh are active (Fig. 14A), and
switches the neurone to the tonic, or single-spike, mode of action potential generation
(Fig. 14C), that allows faithful transfer of synaptic information (Steriade & Llina's,
1988).

312

D. A. McCORMICK AND H. -C. PAPE
DISCUSSION

Inward rectification in thalamic neurones
The present results demonstrate that thalamocortical relay neurones respond to
hyperpolarization of the membrane with a time- and voltage-dependent inward
rectification. The characteristics of the current, Ih, which underlies this rectification
include permeability to both Na+ and K+ ions, a reversal potential (-43 mV)
substantially positive to normal resting potential, and a sensitivity to extracellular
Cs+. The exact contribution of Cl- to Ih in thalamic neurones remains to be
delineated.
Hyperpolarization-activated ionic conductances are a prevalent feature of
electrically excitable cells, including frog skeletal muscle fibres, heart, photoreceptors, neurones in the peripheral and central nervous system, and some types
of axons (Halliwell & Adams, 1982; Mayer & Westbrook, 1983; DiFrancesco, 1985;
Crepel & Penit-Soria, 1986; Baker, Bostock, Grafe & Martius, 1987; Spain et al. 1987;
Bobker & Williams, 1989; Eng et al. 1990). In general, two different types of
hyperpolarization-activated inward currents have been distinguished. One is carried
by K+ ions, is blocked by Ba2+ and Cs+ ions, has fast activation kinetics, and has an
activation range which is dependent on the difference between membrane potential
and potassium equilibrium potential (reviewed in Rudy, 1988). This hyperpolarization-activated K+ current has traditionally been referred to as the inward
rectifier. The other type is permeable to both Na+ and K+ ions, is selectively blocked
by extracellular Cs+ but not Ba2+, has comparatively slow activation kinetics, and
the activation range shows no dependence on the extracellular K+ concentration
(Halliwell & Adams, 1982; Mayer & Westbrook, 1983). The characteristics of the
inward rectifier of thalamocortical relay cells resemble those of the Ba2+-insensitive
conductance in terms of ion selectivity, block by extracellular Cs+ and activation
kinetics. However, compared with the time- and voltage-dependent anomalous
rectifier in hippocampal pyramidal cells (Halliwell & Adams, 1982), cerebellar
Purkinje cells (Crepel & Penit-Soria, 1986), and cerebral cortical pyramidal cells
(Spain et al. 1987) the corresponding current in thalamic neurones (1h) appears to
possess the distinctive feature of a much slower time course of activation which
depends strongly on voltage. These characteristics make the inward rectifier in
thalamic neurones similar to inwardly rectifying conductances found in sensory and
sympathetic ganglion cells (Mayer & Westbrook, 1983; Tokimasa & Akasu, 1990)
and heart cells (DiFrancesco, 1985). The differences in time course of activation
suggest that there may exist more than one type of hyperpolarization-activated,
time-dependent cation current in neurones. These differences may reflect either the
existence of molecularly distinct subclasses of ionic channels or they may result from
post-translational modifications of one common type of ionic channel, although
available data cannot distinguish between these and other possibilities.
Functional role of Ih
The exact role of Ih in the complicated electrophysiological behaviour of thalamic
neurones in vivo is not yet known. However, comparing the results obtained from
recent intracellular recordings of the activity of thalamic neurones during different

h

IN THALAMIC N=EUR ON.ES

313

neuronal states in vivo (reviewed by Steriade & Deschenes, 1984; Steriade & Llina's,
1988) with the physiological characteristics of Ih reported here suggests some strong
possibilities.

Contribution of lh to the resting membrane potential
An important function of 'h in thalamic neurones is the contribution to the normal
resting potential. The value of the membrane potential critically determines the
excitability and pattern of action potentials which are generated by thalamocortical
relay neurones (Fig. 14; Jahnsen & Llina's, 1984a, b). Patterns of activity range from
spontaneous single-spike firing at membrane potentials positive to -55 mV (Fig.
14C) to the rhythmic generation of burst discharges at more hyperpolarized levels
(Fig. 14B). The normal resting potential of non-oscillating thalamic neurones of
-60 to -70 mV is substantially positive to the presumed potassium equilibrium
potential (- 105 mV, McCormick & Prince, 1987), indicating that depolarizing
currents contribute substantially to determining the membrane potential, even in
the absence of synaptic inputs. A significant contribution of the inward current Ih to
the resting potential is indicated by the hyperpolarization of the membrane from rest
during extracellular application of Cs'. This hyperpolarization was in general large
enough to move the cell into the burst mode of action potential generation (Fig.
13A). Thus, recruitment of Ih in these cells can be assumed to move the membrane
potential from a region where the low-threshold Ca2" current is de-inactivated (i.e.
able to be activated) into a region closer, but still subthreshold, to single-spike firing
and in which the low-threshold Ca2" current is inactivated. Thus 'h may contribute
to establishing a true 'resting' condition between burst activity and generation of
single spikes. In addition, the voltage sensitivity of 'h and the transient potassium
currents which are activated by depolarization (D. A. McCormick, unpublished
observations) serve to stabilize the membrane potential by compensating for either
depolarizing or hyperpolarizing influences. Depending on the functional state of the
brain, stronger inputs can move the membrane potential out of the indifferent region
into a region of repetitive single-spike firing that would allow faithful transmission
of incoming synaptic information or into a region of rhythmic burst discharges
(reviewed in Steriade & Llina's, 1988).

Contribution of 'h to intrinsic thalamic oscillation
During certain periods of sleep, or under the influence of barbiturate anaesthesia,
thalamic neurones generate high-frequency (300-500 Hz) bursts of two to six action
potentials (McCarley, Benoit & Barrionuevo, 1983; Steriade & Deschenes, 1984).
These high-frequency bursts may occur in a rhythmic or non-rhythmic manner. The
two main types of rhythmic activity which have been observed in vivo are spindle
waves and 1-2 Hz rhythmic bursting (Lamarre, Filion & Cordeau, 1971; Steriade &
Deschenes, 1984; Steriade, Deschenes, Domich & Mulle, 1985). Spindle waves
appear as an 8-12 Hz oscillation in the electroencephalogram and local thalamic
field potential which steadily increases and then decreases in amplitude over
approximately a 2 s period (Steriade & Deschenes, 1984). Spindle waves appear to
be generated entirely within the thalamus and arise from the interaction of
the GABAergic neurones of the thalamic reticular nucleus amongst themselves and

314

D. A. McC.ORAIICK AND H.-C. PAPE

with thalamocortical relay neurones. Intracellular recordings from thalamocortical
relay neurones in vivo during spindle waves indicate that this activity results from
the periodic occurrence of low-threshold Ca2" spikes activated by the offset of
rhythmically occurring IPSPs which presumably are induced by burst discharges
occurring in the inhibitory neurones of the thalamic reticular nucleus (Steriade &
Deschenes, 1984).
In contrast to spindle wave generation, slow rhythmic (1-2 Hz) burst firing
appears to be an endogenous property of cat thalamocortical relay neurones (Haby
et al. 1988; McCormick & Prince, 1988). This type of rhythmic activity has been
reported to occur in some stages of sleep (Lamarre et al. 1971) and is markedly
enhanced by isolation of thalamocortical relay nuclei either through surgical knife
cuts in vivo (Steriade et al. 1985) or through the maintenance of thalamic slices
in vitro (McCormick & Prince, 1988).
In both types of rhythmic activity, the membrane potential of thalamic relay
neurones oscillates within the activation range of Ih (e.g. between -60 and
-85 mV), although the contribution of Ih to these two types of activity is likely to
be somewhat different. The slow 1-2 Hz oscillation appears to depend critically upon
the presence and strength of lh (Figs 11-13). 'h may contribute to slow rhythmic
burst firing in three distinct ways: (1) by causing an after-hyperpolarization
following the generation of a burst; (2) by determining the overall range of
membrane potential within which the neurone oscillates; and (3) by affecting the
input conductance of the cell and therefore determining the responsiveness of the
membrane potential to fluctuations in current flow.
The properties of the after-hyperpolarization which occurs after a depolarization
or after the generation of a burst indicate that 'h contributes substantially to this
physiological feature of thalamic neurones (Figs 12 and 13). The AHP occurs in a
voltage range which is widely overlapping with the activation range of Ih, it can be
elicited by largely passive depolarizations, its amplitude increases with increases in
duration of the depolarization, and it is readily and reversibly blocked by Cs'. In
other neuronal systems, an AHP which is similar in time course is associated with the
activation of a Ca2+-activated potassium current, 'AHP (Pennefather, Lancaster,
Adams & Nicoll, 1985; Lancaster & Adams, 1986). However, this current appears
to be small or absent in LGND relay neurones (D. A. McCormick, unpublished
observations).
The interaction of Ih and the low-voltage-activated Ca2+ current, It, appears to
determine the 1-2 Hz rhythmic activity that is intrinsic to thalamocortical relay
neurones (Fig. 14). The occurrence of a low-threshold Ca21 spike is associated with
de-a'ctivation of Ih. As the Ca21 spike declines, due to inactivation of It, the lessened
depolarizing influence of lh creates a hyperpolarizing overshoot (the initial phase of
the slow AHP). This hyperpolarization subsequently results in two important
effects: removal of inactivation of It and activation of Ih (Fig. 14B). Activation of Ih
depolarizes the membrane potential towards the threshold for activation of It and
subsequently promotes the generation of a low-threshold Ca21 spike. The generation
of an additional Ca21 spike results in the activation of a burst of fast Na+-K+mediated action potentials, and so the cycle begins again.
Although the voltage-dependent properties of 'h and It, the behaviour of the AHP,

Ih IN THALAMIIC NEURONES

315

and the potent blocking ability of Cs', are all consistent with the proposed ionic
substrate of slow rhythmic bursting, some additional points require further
investigation. First, the rate of 'h de-activation (Fig. 3) appears slow compared with
the duration of the Ca2+ spike (typically between 150 and 200 ms). However, one must
take into account the strong voltage dependence of the rate of Ih de-activation (Fig.
3). For example, the time constant of Ih de-activation averages 347 ms at -55 mV,
the most positive voltage at which it could be determined. During a typical Ca2"
spike, that is elicited from about -80 mV, the membrane depolarizes to between
-50 and -40 mV. The resulting reduction of the time constant of Ih de-activation
might allow a large portion of Ih to de-activate during the Ca21 spike. In addition,
the hyperpolarization-activated cation current, If, in sino-atrial cells of the heart has
recently been shown to be strongly sensitive to the concentration of intracellular
Ca2+ (Hagiwara & Irisawa, 1989). Assuming a similar sensitivity of Ih to [Ca2+]i,
the occurrence of low-threshold Ca21 spikes in thalamic neurones may enhance
de-activation of Ih during depolarization and activation upon hyperpolarization,
thereby increasing the amplitude of the after-hyperpolarization.
An additional point of consideration is that other voltage-dependent conductances
might contribute to the 1-2 Hz rhythmic firing in thalamic neurones. For example,
cardiac pacemaking, which is based to a large degree on the properties of a similar,
hyperpolarization-activated cation current, If (reviewed by DiFrancesco, 1985, and
Noble, 1985), is also strongly influenced by other ionic currents, such as a slow
inward current (IS,) and the delayed rectifier current (IK) (see review by DiFrancesco
& Noble, 1989). In thalamic neurones, the 'classical' delayed rectifier does not seem
to contribute to the generation of rhythmic activity, since its activation threshold is
not reached by the Ca2+ spike. However, the transient voltage-dependent potassium
currents, IA or ID (Jahnsen & Llin's, 1984a, b; Storm, 1988), have voltage ranges of
activation and inactivation which are largely overlapping with It (D. A. McCormick
& H.-C. Pape, unpublished observations) and therefore may slow the approach to
threshold for the Ca2+ spike. In addition, the persistent Na+ inward current (Jahnsen
& Llinas, 1984a, b) could play a similar role to that demonstrated for the slow
inward current in cardiac Purkinje cells. In conclusion, the present data reveal a
critical role of Ih in slow thalamic oscillations. The possible influences of other ionic
conductances, or ionic pumps, however, remain to be investigated in detail (e.g. see
review by Noble et al. 1989).
The influence of Ih on spindle oscillations will differ to some extent from that on
slow rhythmic burst firing due to the fact that spindle wave generation in relay cells
relies upon the occurrence of rhythmic barrages of IPSPs (Steriade & Deschenes,
1984). The time- and voltage-dependent activation of Ih may contribute to spindle
oscillations by influencing the amplitude and time course of these IPSPs. The
amplitude of these IPSPs will be determined in part by the resting membrane
conductance, which can be strongly influenced by Ih. Thus, increases in activation of
Ih may be capable of decreasing the responsiveness of thalamocortical relay neurones
to IPSPs (see McCormick & Pape, 1990). In addition, the activation of Ih by
the hyperpolarization associated with IPSPs, particularly those mediated by increases in potassium conductance (Hirsch & Burnod, 1987; Crunelli, Haby, JassikGerschenfeld, Leresche & Pirchio, 1988), will contribute to a faster repolarization

316

D. A. McCORMICK AND H.-C. PAPE

of the membrane, particularly during the repolarizing phase of the IPSP. This, in
turn, may strongly influence the pattern of activity generated in response to these
synaptic inputs.
In conclusion, activation and de-activation of Ih has important functional
consequences in controlling the responsiveness of thalamic neurones to transient or
sustained hyperpolarizations, in providing the pacemaking for slow oscillatory burst
activity, and in contributing to the determination of the membrane potential during
different states of neuronal function.
We thank Hilarey Feeser and Anne Williamson for critical comments on this manuscript. This
research was funded by the National Institute of Health, the Klingenstein Fund, and the Jacobs
Javits Center in Neuroscience (D.A.M.), and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Ey 8/14-1;
Ey 8/17-1) and the Minister fur Wissenschaft und Forschung NRW (401 452 89) (H.-C. P.).

REFERENCES

ALONSO, A. & LLINAS, R. R. (1989). Subthreshold Na'-dependent theta-like rhythmicity in stellate
cells of entorhinal cortex layer II. Nature 342, 175-177.
BAKER, M., BOSTOCK, H., GRAFE, P. & MARTIUS, P. (1987). Function and distribution of three
types of rectifying channel in rat spinal root myelinated axons. Journal of Physiology 383, 45-67.
BOBKER, D. H. & WILLIAMS, J. T. (1989). Serotonin augments the cation current Ih in central
neurons. Neuron 2, 1535-1540.
COULTER, D. A., HUGUENARD, J. R. & PRINCE, D. A. (1989). Calcium currents in rat thalamocortical relay neurones: kinetic properties of the transient, low-threshold current. Journal of
Physiology 414, 587-604.
CREPEL, F. & PENIT-SORIA, J. (1986). Inward rectification and low threshold calcium conductance
in rat cerebellar Purkinje cells. An in vitro study. Journal of Physiology 372, 1-23.
CRUNELLI, V., HABY, M., JASSIK-GERscHENFELD, D., LERESCHE, N. & PIRCHIO, M. (1988). Cl-- and
K+-dependent inhibitory postsynaptic potentials evoked by interneurones of the rat lateral
geniculate nucleus. Journal of Physiology 399, 153-176.
CRUNELLI, V., KELLY, J. S., LERESCHE, N. & PIRCHIO, M. (1987a). The ventral and dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus of the rat: intracellular recordings in vitro. Journal of Physiology 384,
587-601.
CRUNELLI, V., LERESCHE, N., HYND, J. E., PATEL, N. M. & PARNAVELAS, J. G. (1987b). An in vitro
slice preparation of the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. Journal of Neuroscience Methods 20,
211-219.
CRUNELLI, V., LIGHTOWLER, S. & POLLARD, C. E. (1989). A T-type Ca2" current underlies lowthreshold Ca2" potentials in cells of the cat and rat lateral geniculate nucleus. Journal of
Physiology 413, 543-561.
DIFRANcEsco, D. (1985). The cardiac hyperpolarizing-activated current, I, origins and developments. Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 46, 163-183.
DIFRANcEsco, D. & NOBLE, D. (1989). Current I, and its contribution to cardiac pacemaking. In
Neuronal and Cellular Oscillators, ed. JACKLETT, J. W., pp. 31-57. M. Dekker, Inc., New York.
ENG, D. L., GORDON, T. R., KocsIs, J. D. & WAXMAN, S. G. (1990). Current clamp analysis of a
time-dependent rectification in rat optic nerve. Journal of Physiology 421, 185-202.
HABY, M., LERESCHE, N., JASSIK-GERSCHENFELD, D., SOLTESZ, I. & CRUNELLI, V. (1988).
Spontaneous rhythmic depolarization in the principal cells of the lateral geniculate body in
vitro: the role of NMDA receptors. Compte rendus hebdomadaire des se'ances de l'Acadermie des
sciences, Series III 306, 195-199.
HAGIWARA, N. & IRISAWA, H. (1989). Modulation by intracellular Ca2" of the hyperpolarizationactivated inward current in rabbit single sino-atrial node cells. Journal of Physiology 409,
121-141.

Ih

IN THALAMIC

NEURONES

317

HALLIWELL, J. V. & ADAMS, P. R. (1982). Voltage-clamp analysis of muscarinic excitation in
hippocampal neurons. Brain Research 250, 71-92.
HERNANDEZ-CRUZ, A. & PAPE, H.-C. (1989). Identification of two calcium currents in acutely
dissociated neurons from the rat lateral geniculate nucleus. Journal of Neurophysiology 61,
1270-1283.
HIRSCH. J. C. & BURNOD, Y. (1987). A synaptically evoked late hyerpolarization in the rat dorsal
lateral geniculate nucleus in vitro. Neuroscience 23, 457-468.
HIRSCH, J. C., FOURMENT, A. & MARC, M. E. (1983). Sleep-related variations of membrane
potential in the lateral geniculate body relay neurons of the cat. Brain Research 259, 308-312.
HOTSON, J. R., PRINCE, D. A. & SCHWARTZKROIN, P. A. (1979). Anomalous inward rectification in
hippocampal neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology 42, 889-895.
ISHIHARA, K., MITSUIYE, T., NOMA, A. & TAKANO, M. (1989). The Mg2" block and intrinsic gating
underlying inward rectification of the K' current in guinea-pig cardiac myocytes. Journal of
Physiology 419, 297-320.
JAHNSEN, H. & LLINXS, R. (1984a). Electrophysiological properties of guinea-pig thalamic
neurones: an in vitro study. Journal of Physiology 349, 105-226.
JAHNSEN, H. & LLINAS, R. (1984b). Ionic basis for the electroresponsiveness and oscillatory
properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurones in vitro. Journal of Physiology 349, 227-247.
LAMARRE, Y., FILION, M. & CORDEAU, J. P. (1971). Neuronal discharge of the ventrolateral nucleus
of the thalamus during sleep and wakefulness in the cat. I. Spontaneous activity. Experimental
Brain Research 12, 480-498.
LANCASTER, B. & ADAMS, P. R. (1986). Calcium-dependent current generating the afterhyperpolarization in hippocampal neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology 55, 1268-1282.
LIGHTOWLER, S., HYND, J. W., POLLARD, C. E. & CRUNELLI, V. (1989). Inward rectification of
projection cells in the rat and cat lateral geniculate nucleus. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 15,
1310.
LIVINGSTONE, NI. S. & HUBEL. D. H. (1981). Effects of sleep and arousal on the processing of visual
information in the cat. NVature 291, 554-561.
MCCARLEY, R. W., BENOIT, 0. & BARRIONUEVO, G. (1983). Lateral geniculate nucleus unitary
discharge in sleep and waking: State- and rate-specific aspects. Journal of Neurophysiology 50,
798-818.
MCCORMICK. D. A. & PAPE, H.-C. (1988). Acetylcholine inhibits identified interneurons in the cat
lateral geniculate nucleus. Nature 334, 246-248.
MCCORMICK, D. A. & PAPE, H.-C. (1990). Noradrenergic and serotonergic modulation of a
hyperpolarization-activated cation current in thalamic relay neurones. Journal of Physiology
431, 319-342.
MCCORMICK, D. A. & PRINCE, D. A. (1987). Actions of acetylcholine in the guinea-pig and cat
medial and lateral geniculate nuclei, in vitro. Journal of Physiology 392, 147-165.
MCCORMICK, D. A. & PRINCE, D. A. (1988). Noradrenergic modulation of firing pattern in guinea
pig and cat thalamic neurons, in vitro. Journal of Neurophysiology 59, 978-996.
MATSI DA. H., SAIGUSA, A. & IRISAWA, H. (1987). Ohmic conductance through the inwardly
rectifying K channel and blocking by internal Mg2+. Nature 325, 156-159.
MAYER, M. L. & WESTBROOK, G. L. (1983). A voltage-clamp analysis of inward (anomalous)
rectification in mouse spinal sensory ganglion neurones. Journal of Physiology 340, 19-45.
NOBLE, 1). (1985). Ionic mechanisms in rhythmic firing of heart and nerve. Trends in Neurosciences
8. 499-504.
NOBLE, D., DIFRANCESCO, D. & DENYER, J. (1989). Ionic mechanisms in normal and abnormal
cardiac pacemaker activity. In Neuronal and Cellular Oscillators, ed. JACKLETT, J. W., pp. 59-85.
M. Dekker, Inc., New York.
PENNEFATHER, P., LANCASTER, B., ADAMS, P. R. & NICOLL, R. A. (1985). Two distinct Cadependent K currents in bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cells. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the USA 82, 3040-3044.
RUDY, B. (1988). Diversity and ubiquity of K channels. Neuroscience 25, 729-749.
SPAIN, WV. J., SCHWINDT, P. C. & CRILL, W. E. (1987). Anomalous rectification in neurons from cat
sensorimotor cortex in vitro. Journal of Neurophysiology 57, 1555-1576.
STERIADE, M. & DESCHENES, M. (1984). The thalamus as a neuronal oscillator. Brain Research
Reviews 8, 1-63.

318

D. A. McCORMICK AND H. -C PAPE

STERIADE, M., DESCHENES, M., DoMICH, L. & MULLE, C. (1985). Abolition of spindle oscillations in
thalamic neurons disconnected from nucleus reticularis thalami. Journal of Neurophysiology 54,
1473-1497.
STERIADE, M. & LLINAIS, R. (1988). The functional states of the thalamus and the associated
neuronal interplay. Physiological Reviews 68, 649-742.
STORM, J. F. (1988). Temporal integration by a slowly inactivating K+ current in hippocampal
neurons. Nature 336, 379-381.
TOKIMASA, T. & AKASU, T. (1990). Cyclic AMP regulates an inward rectifying sodium-potassium
current in dissociated bull-frog sympathetic neurones. Journal of Physiology 420, 409-429.
YANAGIHARA, K. & IRISAWA, H. (1980). Inward current activated during hyperpolarization in the
rabbit sino atrial node cell. Pfiugers Archiv 385, 11-19.

