INVITED

JOURNALOFNEUROPHYSIOLOGY

Vol. 76, No. 3, September

1996. Printed

in U.S.A.

Functional Organization of Thalamocortical

REVIEW

Relays

S. MURRAY
SHERMAN
AND R. W. GUILLERY
Department of Neurobiology, State University of New York, Stony Brook, New York 11794-5230;
Human Anatomy, University of Oxford, Oxford OXI 3QX, United Kingdom

and Department

of

ment that it may act as a ‘sharpener’ of the visual image,
a surprisingly banal function for so large and complex a
1. The thalamus has long been seen as responsible for relaying
structure.”
information on the way to the cerebral cortex, but it has not been
During the past 50 years, the complexity of local circuits
until the last decade or so that the functional nature of this relay
has attracted significant attention. Whereas earlier views tended to within the thalamus was being defined, receptive fields of
relegate thalamic function to a simple, machine-like relay process,
single cells in several thalamic nuclei were closely studied,
recent research, reviewed in this article, demonstrates complicated
rich two-way connections with the cerebral cortex and the
circuitry and a rich array of membrane properties underlying the
thalamic reticular nucleus were revealed, a variety of transthalamic relay. It is now clear that the thalamic relay does not have
mitters used by the several thalamic circuits were identified,
merely a trivial function. Suggestions that the thalamic circuits and
and a number of different postsynaptic receptors and voltagecell properties only come into play during certain phases of sleep
sensitive membrane channels were demonstrated for thalato effectively disconnect the relay are correct as far as they go,
mic cells. However, despite this wealth of new information,
but they are incomplete, because they fail to take into account
theories of what the thalamus might actually be doing in an
interesting and variable properties of the relay that, we argue, occur
during normal waking behavior. Although the specific function of
active animal remained disappointing and generally surpristhe circuits and cellular properties of the thalamic relay for waking
ingly dull. The thalamic relay was seen as responsive to
behavior is far from clear, we offer two related hypotheses based
states of arousal, wakefulness, and sleep, modifying its outon recent experimental evidence. One is that the thalamus is not puts to the cerebral cortex in accordance with states of conused just to relay peripheral information from, for example, visual,
sciousness(Livingstone and Hubel 1981; McCarley et al.
auditory, or cerebellar inputs, but that some thalamic nuclei are
1983; Steriade 1992; Steriade and Contreras 1995; Steriade
arranged instead to relay information from one cortical area to
and
McCarley 1990; Steriade et al. 1993) . In addition to this,
another. The second is that the thalamus is not a simple, passive
the role that thalamic circuits might play in the production of
relay of information to cortex but instead is involved in many
epilepsy was defined (Huguenard and McCormick 1992;
dynamic processes that significantly alter the nature of the information relayed to cortex.
Huguenard and Prince 1994; McCormick and Feeser 1990;
Steriade 1992; Steriade and Contreras 1995; Steriade and
Llinas 1988; Steriade et al. 1993). However, it generally
INTRODUCTION
has seemedthat the complex circuitry of the thalamus might
Thalamic functions
play no significant role in processing the information that is
The thalamus has not had good press in the recent past. passedon to the cortex in a normal awake, behaving animal.
After it had been recognized as the major source of inputs One was left with the unpalatable conclusion that in the
to the cerebral cortex (e.g., Elliot-Smith 1910; Nissl 1913)) awake condition the cortex could perhaps have done as well
it had some years of relative glory. We learned that each of with inputs received directly from the retina or the medial
the major afferent pathways from the special sensesand lemniscus as it achieves in reality with its thalamic inputs.
For some years now we (the two authors) have been
from other parts of the brain such as the globus pallidus, the
exploring
the extent to which our different views of the
cerebellum, or the mammillary bodies could only reach the
anatomic
and
functional organization of the thalamus might
neocortex by passing through one or another of the nuclei
be
brought
together
to produce a coherent view of the role
of the thalamus ( summarized in Jones 1985). The thalamus
was seen as serving the cerebral cortex, and all that the of the thalamus. This exploration is far from complete, but
cerebral cortex could do necessarily depended on messages we have reached an interim stage, where it may prove useful
that passedthrough the thalamus. However, a close examina- to summarize our current position, not so much to demontion of what the thalamus might actually be doing asit passes strate what it is that the thalamus may be doing, but more
messagesto the cortex proved disappointing. More than 50 to focus on important new questions that arise from recent
years ago, Glees and Le Gros Clark ( 1941) suggestedthat advances in our knowledge.
In this review, we provide a background of basic current
the lateral geniculate nucleus of the monkey simply representeda 1: 1 relay of single retinogeniculate axons synapsing anatomic and physiological knowledge of the organization
with single geniculate cells, so that messagesmight be of the major thalamocortical pathways. We do not include
passed faithfully from retina to cortex, and more recently the midline and intralaminar groups of thalamic nuclei,
Zeki ( 1993) wrote of this nucleus: “the . . . minutely stud- which are probably organized differently than the rest. We
ied lateral geniculate nucleus has told us very little that is shall use the lateral geniculate nucleus and related visual
of interest about vision as a process, beyond the vague state- relays of the cat as our main example. We do this because
SUMMARY

AND

CONCLUSIONS

0022-3077/96

$5.00 Copyright

0 1996 The American

Physiological

Society

1367

1368

S. M.

SHERMAN

AND

knowledge of the cat’s geniculate relay is more detailed than
that of any other thalamic nucleus, and the analysis of sensory function in the visual pathways is more advanced and
more readily quantifiable. We explore the extent to which
observations on the visual relay may be generalizable to
other thalamic nuclei, particularly the major relay nuclei,
and we look closely at two recent developments in our
knowledge of thalamic organization.
The first of these developments concerns the extent to
which large parts of the thalamus are not parts of pathways
over which sensory systems and subcortical cell groups can
transmit information to the cerebral cortex. Instead, these
‘ ‘higher order’ ’ thalamic cell groups (see below and Guillery
1995) serve as pathways over which one area of cortex can
be informed about what another cortical area is doing. The
second development looks at the thalamic relay not so much
as a system that either passes information to cortex or fails
to pass information, depending on the state of consciousness
of the animal, but rather as a system that can change the
nature of the relay and thus the kind of information reaching
cortex. One example among others that we emphasize later
in this review is the recent finding that the thalamic relay
can operate in two main modes: one transmits accurate information from a limited input in a form suitable for detailed
analysis and the other passes a different pattern of stimuli
to the cortex in a form that provides continuous, but not
analytical, vigilance over a large part of the thalamic input,
allowing the system to switch to detailed analysis when
novel, interesting, or potentially dangerous stimuli are identified (see Guido et al. 1995) q
At present, these two developments are independent of
each other in terms of the evidence that supports either and
also so far as their possible functional interactions may be
concerned. However, we shall argue that if the model of
geniculate function outlined in the second part of this review,
which defines distinct modes of information transfer to cortex for the waking state, can be shown to have general applicability for all major thalamic nuclei, then we shall have a
powerful clue to understanding how one cortical area may
be able to influence the activity of another and how this
influence may vary depending upon circumstances
and in
particular upon the novelty or importance of the output arising from the first cortical area.
Definitions
From a developmental and comparative point of view, the
diencephalon can be divided into four distinct parts: the
epithalamus, the dorsal thalamus, the ventral thalamus, and
the hypothalamus (Jones 1985; Rose 1942). Here, we are
concerned with only the dorsal and the ventral thalamus. The
dorsal thalamus forms the main mass of the diencephalon
in most mammals (Fig. 1), and this is the portion of the
diencephalon from which the cerebral cortex receives most
of its subcortical afferents (see Fig. 2). Generally, when
people write about “the thalamus” they mean the dorsal
thalamus, and we do this here. The ventral thalamus gives
rise to the thalamic reticular nucleus (see Figs. 1 and 2)
and to other structures that do not concern this review. The
reticular nucleus lies on the pathways that link the thalamus
and the cerebral cortex and receives its main afferents from

R. W.

GUILLERY

these pathways (Fig. 2). In turn, the reticular nucleus sends
GABAergic,
inhibitory axons back to the thalamus. In the
cat and other carnivores, the reticular nucleus has at least
two parts involved in visual relays. One is the visual sector of
the reticular nucleus itself and the other is the perigeniculate
nucleus (Mitrofanis
1994; Sanderson 197 1a). Both share
the same basic connections (Ahlskn et al. 1985; Friedlander
et al. 1981; Jones 1985; Stanford et al. 1983; Uhlrich et al.
1991 ) and in the following,
where we make no further
identiication,
we shall include both when we speak of the
reticular nucleus of the cat.
Figure 2 shows in a simplified schema that there are many
distinct cell groups or nuclei in the t,halamus. Each tends to
receive afferents from one major functional source and to
send efferents to one major cortical area, definable in terms
of architecture and function as well as connections. Although
modern methods have tended to reveal a multiplicity of afferent and efferent pathways for each thalamic nucleus, the
one-to-one relationship illustrated in Fig. 2 still provides a
oood conceptual basis for understanding how each thalamic
Eucleus serves as a major relay from a particular afferent
pathway to a corresponding
cortical area. Figure 2 also
shows that within the thalamic reticular nucleus it is possible
to recognize separate sectors that have their major connections with one thalamocortical pathway, traversing one thalamic nucleus or group of nuclei. Finally, Fig. 2 shows there
is a large component of axons that passes from the cerebral
cortex back to the thalamus and reticular nucleus. The
scheme shows these corticofugal axons going back to the
parts of the diencephalon that correspond to the relevant
afferent connections, but we shall see that this relationship
only holds to a limited extent. There are some other corticifugal pathways, not shown in I+l,.
T’c~ 2 but discussed in Cortical
uflerents, which pass back neither to the thalamic reticular
nucleus nor to the thalamic nucleus innervating that cortical
area. These provide opportunities for more complex and
interesting interactions between cortical areas and thalamic
nuclei.
MAJOR

AFFEREN’I’S

TO

GENICULA’I‘E

RELAY

CELLS

Understanding the functional relationships established by
each of the afferent pathways in the thalamus is self-evidently a key to understanding the thalamus. The following
overview of current knowledge of the afferent pathways cannot yet provide that key, but it should serve to focus on the
many details that have yet to be defined before we really
can expect to understand what happens in the thalamus.
For any one afferent system, one would like to know how
its synaptic contacts relate to the thalamic relay neurons that
pass information to the cortex, to the cells of the thalamic
reticular nucleus, or to the interneurons concerned with intrathalamic circuitry. We need to know what parts of these
neurons are contacted (cell bodies, proximal dendrites, distal
dendrites, or spines), what transmitters are released, what
receptors they activate, how they modify second messengers
or currents in the postsynaptic cells, and how they influence
voltage-sensitive conductances. We also would like to know
what pattern of connections is made by single afferent axons
and how this varies within an afferent population. That is,
we need to know whether the relative distribution of terminal

THALAMIC

RELAY

1369

FIG. 1. Photomicrograph
of coronal section through
thalamus of a cat. The-section is stained with an antibody
against parvalbumin, which is found in GABAergic cells of
thalamic reticular nucleus and their terminals. The arrowheads indicate the midline, on the left are shown the dorsal
thalamus (DT) and thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN).

branches to relay neurons, interneurons, or neurons of the
thalamic reticular nucleus is relatively uniform for any one
afferent population, or highly variable and how this distribution differs from one thalamic afferent system to another.
However, not only are we ignorant about many of the details
relating to any one afferent system, but we are not yet in a
position to assert to what extent any of the relationships
establishedfor one thalamic nucleus must necessarily apply
to all or most of the other nuclei. In the following, we will
regard afferent axons that establish similar structural relationships in two nuclei asprobably having similar functional
roles, but we stressthat speculations about function derived
from this assumption are no stronger than the assumption
itself.
In MAJOR AFFERENTS TO GENICULATE RELAY CELLS and

Walker 1938). Although for any one nucleus these are not
the only afferents, they can be regarded as the afferent pathways that give each nucleus its particular functional role,
and we shall, in accordance with general usage,refer to them
as primary afferents.
The primary afferents to the lateral geniculate nucleus
come from the retina. We regard these as comparable with
the auditory afferents that reach the medial geniculate nucleus from the inferior colliculus, or the somatosensoryafferents going to the ventroposterolateral nucleus from the medial lemniscus and spinothalamic pathways (see Jones
1985). Afferents that go to the anterior thalamic nuclei from
the mammillary bodies or to the ventrolateral and ventral
anterior nuclei from the cerebellum and globus pallidus can
reasonably be considered to be in the same category, alOVERVIEW OF AFFERENTS TO OTHER THALAMIC NUCLEI, We though the functional properties of these systems relate to
start with a view of the lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat, events in other parts of the nervous system, rather than events
and we especially focus on the two major laminae of this in the environment.
nucleus, the A laminae. We first identify each of the several
In the lateral geniculate nucleus, one can identify a number
distinct classesof afferent and then look at the morphological of particular features that characterize the primary afferents.
relationships of their terminals. The extent to which the fea1) The retinal afferents are mapped topographically. That
tures seen in this visual relay may be generalized for other is, there is an accurate mapping of the retinal surface onto the
thalamic nuclei is then examined briefly. In the subsequent lateral geniculate nucleus (Polyak 1957; Sanderson 1971a,b;
sections (INTRINSIC CELL PROPERTIES, onward), we look at Walls 1953). Where a group of afferents produces an orderly
the functional properties, including synaptic mechanisms mapping of a sensory surface or of another part of the CNS,
and intrinsic membrane properties, that determine the behav- we shall refer to that afferent system ashaving “local sign”,
ior of the neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus, again because activity in one part of the system necessarily will
considering the extent to which these may be generalizable carry information about the locality of the origin of this
to other thalamic nuclei.
activity.
2) Although we show in INPUTS FROM RETINAL AXONS that
the
temporal patterns of discharge in geniculate cells can
Specific or primary ascending aferents
differ markedly from those of the retinal afferents, the orgaThe first and most obviously important afferents to be nization of receptive fields in terms of their spatial characterconsidered in any discussion of the thalamus are those that istics does not change significantly from the retinal afferents
are often thought of as the specific or primary afferent path- to the geniculate cells (Cleland et al. 1971; Hoffmann et al.
ways. Historically, it was an analysis of theseprimary affer1972; Hubel and Wiesel 1961; Lennie 1980; Sherman 1985;
ents that led to a first successful and functionally significant So and Shapley 1979; Stone 1983; Troy 1983). In this,
subdivision of the thalamocortical pathways (see Jones the geniculate synapse is probably characteristic for other
1985; Le Gros Clark 1932; Rose and Mountcastle 1952; thalamic relays, such as the somatosensory (Jones 1985;

S. M.

SHERMAN

AND

R. W. GUILLERY

Montero 1994; Moody and Sillito 1988; Scharfman et al.
1990; Sillito et al. 1990).
5) They are never postsynaptic to other neural processes,
but where they make synaptic contacts with local interneurons, they may form triads (see above and Fig. 3C). They
generally act upon parts of the dendrites that are close to
the cell bodies of geniculate relay cells, either on the stem
dendrites or on the grape-like appendages close to the primary dendritic branch points of these cells. They also act
upon geniculate interneurons, which themselves are GABAergic, either simply on interneuronal stem dendrites
(Hamos et al. 1985; Montero 1991) or, more commonly,
in triadic arrangements where they contact dendritic output
terminals of these interneurons, and both the retinal and
interneuronal terminals contact the same relay cell dendrite
(Fig. 3C) (Colonnier and Guillery 1964; Famiglietti and
Peters 1972; Guillery 1969a; Hamori et al. 1974; Hamos et
al. 1985, 1987; Montero 1986; Szentagothai et al. 1966;
Wilson et al. 1984).
6) The triads commonly, but not invariably lie within
‘ ‘glomeruli’ ’ , which are tightly packed groups of presynaptic
and postsynaptic profiles partially or completely wrapped in
thin sheets of astrocytic cytoplasm. Although the astrocytic
wrapping has been stressed in most accounts as a possible
diffusion barrier, there are some reasons for thinking that
the extracellular spaces that lie adjacent to the astrocytic
lamellae are likely to allow relatively free diffusion (Kuffler
FIG. 2.
Schematic view of major components
involved
in thalamocortiet al. 1984; Nicholson and Rice 1991) . It seems plausible
cal interactions.
Three relay nuclei of DT (relay nuclei),
three regions of
that the close packing of the synaptic profiles, and the comthe TRN, and three areas of cerebral cortex (cortex)
are shown. Associated
plete
absence of astrocytic processes from the interior of a
regions of DT, TRN, and cortex share the same shading pattern, and some
glomerulus, may be of greater functional significance than
of the interconnections
are shown for the group with fine stippling.
As
shown, a primary
afferent innervates
relay cell on proximal
dendrites, and
the wrapping. The glomerular structure is such that astrocytic
relay the cell projects to layer 4 of cortex. As the axon of relay cell passes
involvement in synaptic activity, which in other parts of the
through TRN, it gives off a collateral that innervates reticular nucleus whose
brain
is known to include transmitter uptake and the clearcells, in turn, project to relay cell. Axons from cortical cells in layer 6
ance of extracellular potassium ions (Kuffler et al. 1984;
innervate
relay cells on their distal dendrites,
and as these axons pass
through
TRN, they also provide
collateral
innervation
of reticular
cell.
Nicholls and Attwell 1990) is essentially excluded from the
As indicated by key, all connections
shown are excitatory
except for the
regions of the triads in the glomeruli, a point that may prove
connection
from the reticular cell to the relay cell, which is inhibitory.
critical in understanding how the geniculate synapses can
vary in their functional properties.
Mountcastle 1980a; Poggio and Mountcastle 1963; Welker
7) Several functionally distinct retinofugal axons reach
1973) and auditory (Aitkin 1973; Aitkin and Webster 1972; the lateral geniculate nucleus. These are the W, X, and Y
Jones 1985; Mountcastle 1980b) relays. This is in contrast ganglion cell classes in the cat retina, which typically innerto the receptive field elaboration that is seen in retina, cortex, vate different geniculate cells, so that the W/X/Y distinction
and other visual structures and on the basis of which the remains among geniculate relay cells (Cleland et al. 197 1;
visual system eventually is able to reconstruct the visual Friedlander et al. 198 1; Hoffmann et al. 1972; Lennie 1980;
scene. That is, there is an obvious function to these other Sherman 1985; So and Shapley 1979; Stone 1983; Troy
visual structures. It is the failure of significant receptive field
1983). Retinogeniculate X axons commonly relate to triads
elaboration across the retinogeniculate synapse that suggests in glomeruli, whereas Y and W axons generally terminate
a unique function for geniculate circuitry.
outside glomeruli in simple arrangements not involving tri3) Most but not all of the retinal afferents are composed of ads (Hamos et al. 1987; Raczkowski et al. 1987; Wilson et
relatively thick axons. They have a characteristic branching
al. 1984).
pattern and relatively thick preterminal swellings (Bowling
8) There are other afferents, that can also be classified as
and Michael 1984; Mason and Robson 1979; Sur et al. 1987; visual afferents, coming from other cell groups (see Fig. 4
Tamamaki et al. 1994). They all have a readily recognizable
for those innervating the A laminae). For instance, those
coming from the superior colliculus go to the C laminae and
appearance in electron micrographs (Fig. 3) (see Famiglietti
and Peters 1972; Guillery 1969a,b, 197 1a; Guillery and Scott the pulvinar in the cat ( Altman and Carpenter 196 I ; Graham
1977; Graybiel 1972; Hatting et al. 1991 a; Niimi et al.
1971; Hamos et al. 1987; Wilson et al. 1984; Wong-Riley
1970), and axons from the pretectum innervate the A lami1972a,b)
4) The retinal afferents are glutamatergic, providing an nae (Cucchiaro et al. 1991a; Graybiel and Berson 1980;
excitatory input to the geniculate cells (Hartveit and HeggelHughes and Mull&in
1984; Kubota et al. 1988; Wahle et
und 1990; Heggelund and Hartveit 1990; Kwon et al. 199 1; al. 1994). The difficulty of providing a rigorous definition

THALAMIC

of a primary afferent is illustrated by these axons. It can be
argued that for afferents coming from the sensory periphery,
like the retinal input to the geniculate relay, it is intuitively
appealing to treat the input that reaches the thalamus after the
fewest number of synapses as the primary afferent. However,
collicular afferents to the C laminae share some of the features of retinal afferents enumerated above (Torrealba et al.
1981), and because it is possible to regard the tectothalamic
afferents as a phylogenetically
older visual afferent to the
thalamus than the retinal input to the lateral geniculate nucleus, there is an alternative, equally appealing logic in treating these collicular afferents as primary afferents. In contrast,
pretectal afferents to the lateral geniculate nucleus (see
above) are probably best treated as a separate category, primarily because they are mostly GABAergic rather than glutamatergic (Cucchiaro et al. 199 1a; Wahle et al. 1994).
In summary, there are a number of characteristics
that
help to define the primary afferent axons. One that may
prove critical for a definition has not yet been mentioned.
This is the absence of any branches going to the thalamic
reticular nucleus (see Figs. 4 and 6)) a branch that is characteristic of most or all other geniculate afferents and is discussed in more detail below (Reticular agerents). The major
defining features of primary afferents we have described are
the size and the fine structural characteristics
of the terminals, the nature of synaptic contacts established, and the
formation of the contacts upon proximal dendrites. The
transmitter ( glutamate) and the postsynaptic receptors and
currents also may prove critical in defining primary afferents
in all parts of the thalamus.
Cortical

afjcef-ents

Although the existence of corticothalamic axons was recognized early (Cajal 19 11; von Flechsig 1896; Polyak
1957)) clear experimental evidence about these axons could
not be provided until first the axonal degeneration methods
and later the autoradiographic tracing methods became available. For the visual pathways, corticogeniculate axons were
described in the 1960s by axon degeneration methods and
later by autoradiographic
axon tracing (Beresford
1962;
Guillery 197 lb; HolEnder 1974; Jones and Powell 1969b;
Lin and Kaas 1977; Lund et al. 1975; Robson 1983; Szentigothai 1963). More recent studies in which a few individual
axons are filled with biocytin (e.g., Bourassa and DeschEnes
1995) have provided particularly striking images of these
axons.
The following points have been established about the corticogeniculate axons.
1) They are organized topographically. That is, this projection shows local sign, and retinotopically the projection
from the cortex corresponds to that from the retina. So far
as is known, this is true for all of the cortical areas that
send axons to the lateral geniculate nucleus (Updyke 1975 ) ,
although it is likely that as retinotopy becomes lost in the
far reaches of the multiplicity of visual cortical areas, so
the local sign of the corticogeniculate pathway from certain
extrastriate visual areas also might be lost.
2) The corticogeniculate
axons are relatively fine axons
that tend to run along the “lines of projection”.
These are
lines that represent single points in the visual field, passing,

RELAY

1371

in the words of Walls ( 1953)) through the geniculate layers
like a toothpick through a club sandwich (see also Bishop
et al. 1962). These axons give off small “drumstick-like”
side branches along their intrageniculate course and often
pass through more than one lamina. That is, as would be
expected from point 1) above and the details given earlier
about the arrangement of the retinal afferents, the individual
axons relate to geniculate cells that receive from a single
small area of the visual field.
3). In electron micrographs, these axons are seen to have
small terminals (Fig. 3A) that tend to contact small profiles
located peripherally on the dendritic arbors of relay cells or
on slender, stem dendrites of interneurons. They rarely make
synaptic contacts onto proximal dendrites of relay cells, nor
do they commonly contribute to the triads or to the geniculate glomeruli (Cucchiaro et al. 1991 b; Guillery 1969a,b,
1971 a; Montero 199 1; Robson 1983; Vidnyinszky
and H&mori 1994; Weber and Kalil 1987; Wilson et al. 1984)) and
when they do, they relate to the peripheral rather than the
central parts of the glomeruli (Vidnyjnszky
and HBmori
1994). Weber et al. ( 1993) have suggested that the majority
of their contacts are onto the dendritic shafts of interneurons,
although Montero ( 199 1) reports that relay cells receive
more of these terminals than do interneurons.
4) The corticogeniculate
axons, like the retinogeniculate
axons, appear to be glutamatergic. Further details are given
in INPUTS FROM CORTICAL
AXONS.
5) In the lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat, the corticogeniculate axons form the plurality of synaptic contacts,
probably 40-50% (Guillery 1969b; Wilson et al. 1984).
6) The corticogeniculate
axons in the cat arise in several of the visual cortical areas, including areas 17, 18,
and 19 (Updyke
1975, 1977). The connections from areas
17 and 18 go to all of the geniculate laminae, whereas
those from area 19 go only to the small-celled
C layers
(which project to 19 but not 17 and 18). In the monkey, it
is clear that striate as well as extrastriate cortical regions
innervate the lateral geniculate nucleus, but the details of
the extent and pattern of extrastriate
input have yet to
be elucidated (Lin and Kaas 1977; Maioli et al. 1984;
Squatrito et al. 1988).
7) Some, and possibly all, corticogeniculate
axons send
collateral branches that innervate the cells of the thalamic
reticular nucleus, and this projection, too, can have local
sign, which for corticoreticular
axons from area 17 of the
rabbit can be as precise as the local sign in the corticogeniculate pathway (Crabtree and Killackey 1989; Montero et al.
1977) and in the cat shows good local sign in terms of
receptive field localization ( Sanderson 197 1a,b; Uhlrich et
al. 1991).
8) All of the corticogeniculate
axons that go to the
lateral geniculate nucleus arise from pyramidal cells in
layer 6 of the relevant cortical areas (Gilbert and Kelly
1975; Katz 1987). The contribution
going to different
geniculate layers appears to arise in different tiers of cortical layer 6 in the striate cortex of the monkey (Conley
and Raczskowski
1990; Fitzpatrick
et al. 1994; Lund et
al. 1975).
Although it is known that there are layer 5 pyramids
that also send axons to the thalamus (Bourassa et al. 1995;
Deschsnes et al. 1994; Rockland 1994)) there is currently

1372

S. M. SHERMAN

AND R. W. GUILLERY

FIG. 3. Series of electron micrographs
illustrating representative features of terminals in lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat.
A : typical glomerulus with many interrelating terminals of different types, including
F terminals (F), a RSD terminal (RSD),
and a RLP (retinal) terminal (RLP) . A dendritic profile (d) also is present in glomerulus. B: postembedding y-aminobutyric
acid (GABA) labeling of F terminal (F) .
Immunogold, seen as small black spots,
was used to identify this profile as GABAergic. Note lack-of GABA labeling in
RSD and RLP terminals and in dendritic
profile (d) . The arrowheads point to synaptic contacts from postsynaptic side. C: triadic synaptic circuit. An F terminal (F)
makes a contact onto a dendrite (d), and a
RLP (retinal) terminal (RLP) contacts
same dendrite and F terminal. Arrowheads
point to these contacts. Scale bar in each
panel is 1 pm.

no evidence that any reach the lateral geniculate nucleus
and the corticothalamic axons that arise in layer 5 are
considered further below (Cortical afferents) .
9) Gilbert (1977) has described the receptive fields of
layer 6 cells as relatively large and as a mixture of ocular
dominance categories. However, layer 6 gives rise to a
claustral as well as a geniculate input (Katz 1987; LeVay
and Sherk 198 1) . Recent evidence indicates that the cells
projecting to claustrum have larger receptive fields than
do those projecting to the lateral geniculate nucleus
(Grieve and Sillito 1995)) but exactly what sort of messagesthe lateral geniculate nucleus receives from layer 6
remains somewhat uncertain, and it is entirely possible
that receptive field properties themselves are not the feature that is most relevant to the action of these axons; this

is considered in INPUTS FROM CORTICAL AXONS. An older
report by Tsumoto and Suda (1980) makes two important
points about the cortical axons innervating the lateral geniculate nucleus from area 17. First, they represent a heterogeneous population that seems likely to have multiple
functions. When extrastriate inputs are included, the heterogeneity of inputs is likely to be greatly enlarged. Second,
many of the cells they identified as corticogeniculate by
antidromic activation from the lateral geniculate nucleus
had no detectable responses to visual stimuli under the
conditions of their preparation (i.e., anesthetized and paralyzed), suggesting that published receptive field studies
of corticogeniculate cells may undersample significantly
the sorts of receptive field properties represented in this
pathway in awake, behaving animals.

THALAMIC

RELAY

1373

FIG. 4.
Schematic view of major afferents to lateral
geniculate nucleus of cat, following
conventions
of Fig.
2. Lateral geniculate
nucleus contains both relay cells
($ZZed circle) and interneurons
(open oval). For simplicity,
only the major and best studied inputs have
been followed
into the thalamus. Smaller and less wellstudied inputs end in asterisks (*), and details of their
connections
within thalamus can be found in text. Neurotransmitters
and inhibitory
or excitatory
effects of
various inputs are indicated. Note that cholinergic
axons from parabrachial
region (axons that also colocalize nitric oxide) excite relay cells but tend to inhibit
both GABAergic
cell populations
(i.e., reticular cells
and interneurons).
5HT,
serotonin;
ACh, acetylcholine; BF, basal forebrain;
DRN, dorsal raph6 nucleus
(brain stem) ; EAA, excitatory
amino acid (e.g., glutamate);
Hist, histamine;
LGN,
lateral geniculate
nucleus; NO, nitric oxide; NOT, nucleus of optic tract
( pretectum) ; PBR, parabrachial
region ( brain stem) ;
TMN, tuberomammilary
nucleus (hypothalamus).

DIFFICULTIES
IN
WAY.
Despite

STUDYING

THE

CORTICOGENICULATE

PATH-

the fact that corticifugal axons represent the
largest single input to the thalamus (see Cortical ~@erents)
and have been well documented for almost three decades, we
know surprisingly little about their function. Considerable
attention continues to be directed at this pathway (Koch
1987; Sherman 1993; Sherman and Koch 1986, 1990). Past
studies have been somewhat confusing, some suggesting that
the pathway facilitates relay cell firing, whereas others suggest the opposite (Baker and Malpeli 1977; Geisert et al.
198 1; Kalil and Chase 1970; McClurkin and Marrocco 1984;
McClurkin
et al. 1994; Richard et al. 1975; Schmielau and
Singer 1977). Schmielau and Singer (1977) have proposed
that corticogeniculate input is important to binocular functions, such as stereopsis. More recent studies have suggested
that the pathway affects temporal properties of relay cell
discharges (Godwin et al. 1996; McClurkin
et al. 1994) or
establishes correlated firing among nearby relay cells with
similar receptive field properties (Sillito et al. 1994). Despite these several hypotheses, we cannot yet assign any
functions that would require the great size of the pathway,
and the function of the corticothalamic axons remains one of
the most important enigmas of thalamocortical relationships.
There are several interrelated problems that contribute to
difficulties faced by studies of this pathway.
1) With few exceptions (e.g., Sillito et al. 1994; Tsumoto
et al. 1978), virtually all studies of this pathway have involved

total inactivation of the entire area of relevant visual cortex by
cooling or ablation, and the studies were performed in anesthetized cats. In such anesthetized cats, the pathway already may
be subdued or inactive, so cortical inactivation might have little
further effect. It thus might prove important to activate (as well
as inactivate) the pathway. However, activation is technically
difficult with the traditional means of electrical stimulation,
because this also antidromically discharges geniculate relay
cells, interfering with any effects sought.
2). The common approach of inactivation of all relevant cortex may be too crude. Because corticogeniculate axons, as a
group, appear to excite relay cells directly and inhibit them
indirectly (see Figs. 2 and 4), any global inactivation may simply
sum these effects to near 0, leaving a weak, variable residue.
3) Related to the above, it is not clear that all corticogeniculate axons innervate their targets in the same pattern. In
fact, as is indicated by Fig. 5, A and B, it is not even clear
what the precise distribution of inputs to relay cells, reticular
cells, and interneurons is, and this distribution is important
to the eventual effects on relay cells. Each pattern illustrated
in Fig* 5, A and Is, may exist but for different populations
of corticogeniculate
axon. Some axons may innervate only
relay cells and others only reticular cells and/or interneurons. As a result of these possible variations in connections,
perhaps the final action upon the relay cells of some corticogeniculate axons mostly is to excite (or depolarize) these
cells and of others mostly to inhibit (or hyperpolarize) them,

S. M.

VISUAL
CORTEX

SHERMAN

AND

B
Q

TRN cell or
interneuron

R. W. GUILLERY

different roles for this pathway, such as controlling binocular
disparities for stereopsis (Schmielau and Singer 1977)) enhancing correlated firing among related geniculate cells (Sillito et al. 1994), and switching geniculate cells between the
qua litatively differen t respon se modes (discu ssed in INTRINSIC CELL
PROPERTIES
below ) (see God win et al. 1996). We
need a fuller understand ing of how corticoth alamic axons
act up0 n geniculate and reticular ccl Is and of the ex tent to
which this action may be nonuniform for all of the corticogeniculate axons.
aiencepnailc

LGN

D

C
I

TRN cdl

I

FIG. 5.
Schema showing examples of different types of inhibitory
circuits involving
geniculate relay cells. See Fig. 4 legend for abbreviations.
Excitatory
cells and their synaptic outputs are shown as solid circles and
inhibitory
(GABAergic)
cells and their outputs are shown as open circles.
A: circuit beginning
with cortical axon that represents feedforward
inhibition. A cortical axon innervates
relay cell b and directly excites it, but a
collateral of this same axon excites reticular cell or interneuron
2 that then
inhibits relay cell b . B : circuit beginning
with cortical axon that does not
represent feedforward
inhibition.
The main difference
with A is that, although cortical axon still directly innervates
and excites relay cell b, its
collaterals
excite reticular cells or interneurons
1 and 3, which then inhibit
relay cells a and c. There would be no inhibitory
effect on relay cell b .
C: circuit beginning with relay cell axon that represents feedback inhibition.
A collateral of axon from relay c eZZ b excites reticular cell 2, which then
inhibits
cell b. D : circuit beginning
with relay cell axon that does not
represent feedback inhibition.
Here, axon collaterals from relay cell b excite
reticular cells 1 and 3, which then inhibit relay cells a and c, but do not
directly influence relay cell b. There is thus no feedback inhibition.
However, to follow the circuit further, the inhibition
of relay cells a and c
reduce their excitatory
effect on reticular cell 2, resulting in less inhibition
from this reticular cell onto relay cell b . Thus instead of feedback inhibition
seen in C, this circuit represents opposite: feedback disinhibition.

so that specific patterns of activity are critical but are obscured with global activation or inactivation of cortex.
4) Most attempts to study the corticogeniculate pathway
have focused on a single presumed function. It is more likely
that there are multiple duties carried out in parallel by different cell types, analogous to the parallel W, X, and Y pathways emanating from the retina, and this would be consistent
with the previous point. Despite of evidence for heterogeneity of corticifugal axons (see Cortical afferents), the possibility of more than one type of corticogeniculate axon since
then largely has been ignored. There may well be several

neurons

AFFERENTS.
Strictly speaking, the reticular nucleus is a part of the ventral thalamus, which receives afferents from the dorsal thalamus and cerebral cortex and sends
axons back to the dorsal thalamus (Jones 1975, 1985). In
addition, like the dorsal thalamus, it also receives afferents
from the brain stem (Asanuma 1993; Berman 1977; Bickford
et al. 1993; Cucchiaro et al. 1991a, 1993; Edwards and de
Olmos 1976; Hu et al. 1989a; Swanson and Hartman 1975;
Uhlrich et al. 1988) and from superior colliculus (Harting
et al. 1980), but, unlike the dorsal thalamus, it receives
innervation from basal forebrain (Bickford
et al. 1994a;
Chen and Bentivoglio 1993). The reticular nucleus sends
no axons to the cortex and in this it is distinct from the
dorsal thalamus (Jones 1985).
For many years, a detailed study of the axons that pass
from the reticular nucleus to the thalamus proved difficult
because the reticular cells lie among thalamocortical
and
corticothalamic axons. However, the axons now have been
demonstrated clearly by anterograde and retrograde tracing
methods with both light and electron microscopy (Crabtree
and Killackey 1989; Cucchiaro et al. 1990, 199 1b; Harting
et al. 1991a; Jones 1975; Liu et al. 1995b; Pinault et al.
1995; Uhlrich et al. 1991) . They pass in an ordered array
from the thalamic reticular nucleus to each of the major
thalamic nuclei, and they are thought to be crucial to the
relationships established between cortical and thalamic activitv for a number of reasons.
I) The reticular cells themselves receive afferents from
collateral branches of thalamocortical
and corticothalamic
axons as these pass through the reticular nucleus (see Fig.
2 and 4) (see also Bourassa and Deschenes 1995; Conley
and Diamond 1990; Conley et al. 199 1; Crabtree 1992a,b;
Crabtree and Killackey 1989, Friedlander et al. 198 1; Harting et al. 1991a; Jones 1975, 1985; Stanford et al. 1983). It
is not clear if only particular subpopulations of these axons
send collaterals to the reticular nucleus or if all of them
do. The issue merits study because cortical and thalamic
influences on reticular activity will depend crucially on the
particular population of cortical and thalamic cells that innervate reticular cells. Because there are relatively few reticular
cells compared with the numbers of cortical and thalamic
cells, it is possible that not all of the axons connecting thalamus and cortex give off branches to the reticular cells. There
as yet have been no studies directed at the question of how
many corticothalamic
axons branch to innervate reticular
cells, but this issue has been studied for geniculocortical
axons. Most cells belonging to each of the major geniculate
W, X, and Y cell classes innervate the thalamic reticular
RETICULAR

f

relay cell

umwxtorv

THALAMIC

nucleus (Friedlander et al. 198 1; Stanford et al. 198 1, 1983).
The few that fail to show any branches among the reticular
cells may be false negatives due to the difficulty of getting
the intracellular label, horseradish peroxidase, into these fine
collaterals.
2) Within the reticular nucleus there are separate sectors,
each sector related primarily to one modality or to one group
of thalamic nuclei and their cortical connections. That is,
the cells within each reticular sector receive afferents from
a specific thalamic cell group and from related cortical areas
and in turn send their axons to cells in the same thalamic
cell groups (Jones 1975, 1985).
3) In Local interneuronal and reticular connections, we
show that each sector of the reticular nucleus (related to
visual, auditory, somatosensory,
etc., relays) can show a
complex organization with different subregions having distinct connections. This is strikingly evident in the cat’s visual
relay, where the perigeniculate nucleus is linked primarily
to the geniculate A laminae (Uhlrich et al. 199 1) , whereas
the visual sector of the main body of the reticular nucleus
connects to other parts of the lateral geniculate nucleus
(Bickford
et al. 1994b; Cucchiaro et al. 1990). This draws
attention to the fact, discussed further in local interneuronal
and reticular connections, that each sector of the thalamic
reticular nucleus (i.e., related to the visual, somatosensory,
auditory, etc., relays) has a complex organization, with different subregions organized differently and relating to different portions of the thalamocortical pathways.
4) The interconnections
among thalamus, reticular nucleus, and cortex show clear evidence for local sign. For the
visual pathways, this means that a single point in the retina
(or visual field) can be mapped onto a small part of the
lateral geniculate nucleus, visual cortex ( area 17)) or the
reticular nucleus through each of the systems of interconnecting pathways (Bourassa and Deschenes 1995; Conley
and Diamond 1990; Crabtree and Killackey 1989; Liu et al.
1995b; Montero and Scott 1981; Montero et al. 1977; Shosaku et al. 1984; Uhlrich et al. 199 1) .
5) The reticular cells, like the thalamic interneurons, are
GABAergic,
and their geniculate terminals are not easy to
distinguish from those of geniculate interneurons. Both form
F terminals (see Fig. 3). Several recent studies (Cucchiaro
et al. 199 lb; Harting et al. 199 1a; Liu et al. 1995b; Uhlrich et
al. 199 1; see also Montero and Scott 198 1) have successfully
labeled axon terminals of reticular cells and have shown that
the vast majority of them contact relay cells, both on their
somata and their dendrites, and lie outside the glomeruli.
Only a few of these reticular terminals (5 - 10% ) contact
interneurons or terminate in glomeruli.
6) With two known exceptions, all inputs to the lateral
geniculate nucleus and the reticular nucleus send a branch
to each of these two targets. One exception is the retinal
input, which innervates the lateral geniculate nucleus only,
and the other is the GABAergic
projection from the basal
forebrain, which targets the thalamic reticular nucleus but
not the lateral geniculate nucleus. Inputs targeting both structures include that from cortex, brain stem (i.e., cholinergic,
noradrenergic, and serotonergic axons from midbrain and
pons), tectum (see above), pretectum, hypothalamus, and
intrinsic axons from the reticular nucleus itself (Airaksinen
and Panula 1988; Conley and Diamond 1990; Conley et

RELAY

137s

al. 1991; Crabtree 1992a,b; Crabtree and Killackey 1989;
Cucchiaro et al. 1991a; de Lima and Singer 1987a,b; de
Lima et al. 1985; Liu et al. 1995b; Uhlrich et al. 1988,
1993). The C laminae of the lateral geniculate nucleus also
receive afferents from the parabigeminal nucleus and the
superior colliculus (Graham 1977; Graybiel 1972; Harting
et al. 199 1a,c; Niimi et al. 1970). A contribution to the
reticular nucleus from these structures has not yet been documented.
Although the reticular neurons are sometimes treated as
displaced interneurons, this is not acceptable as a developmental interpretation, because the reticular nucleus develops
from the ventral thalamus, which is quite distinct from the
dorsal thalamic origin of the main thalamic nuclei and their
interneurons. The suggestion (Montero 1989) that the largest
interneurons, the ones that lie between the main geniculate
laminae, resemble the perigeniculate cells in terms of their
synaptic inputs may point to functional similarities, but present evidence says nothing about developmental origins.
FROM
LOCAL
GENICUL,ATE
INTERNEURONS.
The
local interneurons have many vesicle containing dendritic
processes that are presynaptic to other geniculate dendrites
and that are postsynaptic to other vesicle containing profiles,
generally the retinal terminals that form one component of
a triad (see Fig. 3C). The triads are a characteristic thalamic
feature and presumably allow for a limited part of an interneuron to act on transmission along the retinogeniculocortical pathway. The suggestion that the triads, which involve
the dendritic output terminals of inter-neurons, may operate
using only a localized portion of the interneurons and not
involve any axonal action potentials is considered more fully
below in the discussion of cable properties of these cells
( Cable properties).
The dendritic GABAergic
terminals of the interneurons
are commonly, but not invariably, seen as swellings at the
end of thin stalks. Occasionally one can see that a stem
dendrite of an interneuron contains a collection of synaptic
vesicles and also makes a synaptic contact with another dendrite, generally of a relay cell. In addition, at least some
interneurons have axons, which can be distinguished from
the dendrites light microscopically
(Guillery 1966; Tombol
1969) and on fine structural grounds (Hamos et al. 1985;
Montero 1987 ) . These axons are presumably responsible for
the action potentials that occasionally can be recorded from
geniculate interneurons (Friedlander et al. 198 1; McCormick
and Pape 1988; Sherman and Friedlander 1988). However, it
is difficult to determine whether all interneurons can generate
action potentials or only some; those that have axons are
most likely to have action potentials. Every interneuron from
which recordings have been obtained by conventional techniques has had action potentials, and all geniculate interneurons that have been labeled for morphological analysis were
first experimentally identified by physiological criteria. Because physiological identification of an interneuron requires
that they exhibit action potentials, a population of axonless
interneurons that have no action potentials may exist but
would not be readily identified with conventional techniques.
Action potentials may be required only for axonal outputs,
but would not be necessary for dendritic outputs (see Cable
properties). Montero ( 1987 ) has presented evidence that the
AFFERENTS

I376

S. M.

SHERMAN

AND

dendritic terminals end chiefly in glomeruli and are triadic,
whereas the axonal terminals are extraglomerular and nontriadic. If it should prove that one is discharged with the action
potential whereas. the other is not, then the distinction becomes more important.
ROLE

OF

LOCAL

AND

RETICULAR

INHIBITORY

CIRCUITS

IN

The action of any set of afferents on
the geniculate relay cells and through them on the cortex
will depend on several factors. Not only is the balance of the
direct afferent action upon relay cells relative to interneurons
important, but also the extent to which the further, indirect
pathways through relay, reticular, and local inhibitory neurons in turn affect the membrane properties of the relay cells
themselves will matter. The real difficulty is that we have
no knowledge of how these local circuits operate during any
particular visual episode, and all that we can do at present
is to study the membrane changes of the geniculate cells
and then use our knowledge
of the local circuits, of the
relevant transmitters, and of the receptors likely to be involved to devise pharmacological
attacks that may reveal
the workings of the circuits.
Furthermore, the detailed connectivity pattern of individual axons matters greatly (see Fig. 5). We already have
explained above (CorticaZ aflerents) why this is important
for cortical afferents (Fig. 5, A and B). Figure 5, C and D,
makes an analogous point for the feedback pathway between
the lateral geniculate and thalamic reticular cells or interneurons. This is often thought of as “feedback inhibition” (Ahls6n et al. 1985; Lindstriim 1982). The circuit shown by Fig.
5C would result in feedback inhibition, because firing of a
relay cell (cell a) would activate a local inhibitory cell that,
by virtue of the circuit as drawn, inhibits cell a. However,
the circuit of Fig. 5D is subtly different. Here, firing of a
relay cell (cell h) leads to activation of local cells that inhibit
not cell h but rather its neighbors. Furthermore, inhibition
of these neighbors would reduce their excitation of the reticular cell that inhibits cell h, thereby implying a circuit for
feedback disinhibition in Fig. 5 D in contrast to the feedback
inhibition shown on the left. Of course, the actual circuit
may represent a combination of both connectivity patterns.
Although there is some preliminary evidence that at least
part of the circuit linking the reticular nucleus and the lateral
geniculate nucleus involves feedback inhibition as shown
by Fig. 5D (Lo and Sherman 1994), in general we have
insufficient evidence to understand how these circuits work.
This is true of most circuits involving relay cells. Because
most afferent pathways, typically even their individual component axons, innervate both relay cells and local inhibitory
cells (reticular cells or interneurons)
and we do not know
the details of the complete circuits, we generally cannot
predict how these circuits will function under physiological
conditions when specific subsets of afferents become active.
THALAMIC

FUNCTION.

R. W. GUILLERY

de Lima et al. 1985; Fitzpatrick et al. 1989; Raczkowski
and
Fitzpatrick 1989; Par6 et al. 1988; Smith et al. 1988; Uhlrich
et al. 1988); these axons also seem to colocalize nitric oxide
(Bickford
et al. 1993). Noradrenergic
afferents exist that
also emanate from the parabrachial region, lying amid the
cholinergic cells, but this is a relatively small projection (de
Lima and Singer 1987b; Fitzpatrick et al. 1989; Par-6 et al.
1988; Smith et al. 1988) ; these cells do not colocalize nitric
oxide (Bickford et al. 1993). Also providing input are serotonergic cells in the dorsal raph6 nucleus (de Lima and
Singer 1978a), GABAergic
cells in the pretectum (Cucchiaro et al. 1991a, 1993; Wahle et al. 1994), and histaminergic
cells from the tuberomammilary
nucleus of the hypothalamus (Airaksinen
and Panula 1988; Uhlrich et al. 1992).
Although the afferents from the pretectal nuclei show a
differential distribution to the X and Y pathways in the cat
and to different geniculate laminae in Galago, (Cucchiaro
et al. 1993; Funke and Eysel 1995; Harting et al. 1986), the
major brain stem afferents are generally treated as though
they have no evidence of local sign or functional localization
and are often regarded as “diffuse”
projections. When one
considers the possible functions of any one of these afferent
pathways in an awake behaving animal, the degree to which
that pathway has local sign or lacks it will affect significantly
the possible functional roles that can be assigned to that
pathway, and for this reason, the precise functional meaning
one can assign to a “diffuse brain stem projection’ ’ bears
brief discussion.
Strictly speaking the term implies a lack of specificity of
connections that is hard to prove. A truly diffuse projection
would be one in which no component of the total projection
shows any preference within the total terminal field of the
projection for any particular cell group or part of a cell
group. A diffuse projection is by its very nature one that
must have generalized, nonlocalized actions on the highly
localized thalamocortical pathways. However, evidence for
‘ ‘diffuse’ ’ connections is commonly based on relatively
large lesions or tracer injections or on lesions or tracer injections that are not specific in terms of any localization of
function known for the lesioned or labeled region. Where
experiments involve just a few individual axons, it may be
possible to define a degree of localization or a wide spread
of terminal ramifications that cannot be shown by cruder
methods involving larger axon populations. As such experiments involving rather few, well-localized
axons become
available, it may be possible to define some truly diffuse
brain stem pathways, but at present, in the absence of clear
evidence, it may be better to speak of these brain stem pathways as generalized, widespread, or poorly localized, leaving
the precise patterning undefined.
OVERVIEW

OF

AFFERENTS

TO

OTHER

THALAMIC

NUCLEI

Brain stem aperents
Figure 4 summarizes what we know of the other afferent
pathways to the geniculate A laminae and thalamic reticular
nucleus from the pretectum, the parabrachial region, the
basal forebrain, and the hypothalamus. The main subcortical,
nonretinal input consists of cholinergic axons emanating
from the parabrachial region (de Lima and Singer 1987b;

Primary

aferents

In this section,
afferent systems
lateral geniculate
defined and may
capacities of each

we do not provide an analysis of each the
in the detail that we have given for the
nucleus. Many points still remain to be
only become of interest as the functional
group of afferent pathways are understood.

THALAMIC

Each of the major thalamic nuclei can be thought of as
having its own primary afferents, and for the medial geniculate nucleus (Jones and Rockel 1971; Majorossy and Kiss
1976)) the ventrobasal complex (Ralston 1969; Jones and
Powell 1969a,b; Liu et al. 1995a), the ventrolateral and
ventral anterior nuclei ( Aumann et al. 1994; Grofova and
Rinvik 1974; Harding 1973; Kultas-Ilinsky
et al. 1980,
199 1) and the anterior nuclei (Somogyi et al. 1978) the
primary afferents can be readily defined and are seen to share
many of the structural features of retinogeniculate afferents
described above and illustrated in Fig. 3. That is, these afferent axons have much the same light and electron microscopical appearance as the retinal afferents, tend to terminate on
large dendrites near cell bodies, commonly relate to glomerular structures, form triads, and, where the transmitter has
been defined, are glutamatergic (Liu et al. 1995a; Ralston
199 1I Salt 1987; Salt and Eaton 1989).
As a first approximation, one can anticipate that where
receptive fields can be defined, there is not much change in
receptive field properties when primary afferent axons are
compared with the thalamic relay cells. This has held for
those examples where receptive field properties have been
defined, as in the ventrobasal complex (Iwamura and Inubushi 1974: Jones 1985; Mountcastle 1980a; Mountcastle et
al. 1963; Poggio and Mountcastle 1963; Welker 1973) or
medial geniculate nucleus ( Aitkin 1973; Aitkin and Webster
1972; Calford and Webster 198 1; Galambos 1952; Jones
1985; Mountcastle 1980b; Starr and Don 1972). Where a
nucleus receives more than one functional type of afferent,
details may differ as they do for X and Y cells in the lateral
geniculate nucleus. For example, in the ventrobasal complex
in primates, the synaptic relationships of spinothalamic axons tend to resemble those of the Y cell terminations, forming predominantly simple axodendritic extra-glomerular synapses, whereas the lemniscal axons are more like the X cell
terminations, tending to synapse in glomeruli and commonly
forming triadic junctions (Ma et al. 1987; Ralston and Ralston 1993 ). It appears that in the rat ventrobasal nucleus,
where there are no interneurons and thus essentially no triads, any one dendritic segment can receive afferents from
both ascending pathways, but in the monkey, there is, as
yet, no good evidence that the two systems converge onto
single neurons or single dendrites. This may prove to be an
important problem for comparisons between the somatosensory and visual pathways. In the lateral geniculate nucleus
of the cat. a single relay cell typically receives from either
one or the other (X or Y) afferent pathway not both (Cleland
et al. 197 1; Hoffman et al. 1972; Sherman 1985; Stone
1983).
Cm-firwl

crff&-m
ts
*.

Each of the thalamic nuclei also appears to receive afferents from the cortex (Berson and Graybiel 1983; Jones and
Powell 1968; Kiinzle 1976; Rinvik 1968; Updyke 1977) and
these generally arise from layer 6 but may (see below) also
come from layer 5 pyramidal cells. In general, the layer 6
corticothalamic terminals are, like those in the lateral geniculate nucleus, relatively small, have round synaptic vesicles,
and are presynaptic to small, that is, peripheral, dendritic
prof-iles (Jones and Powell 1969a,b; Liu et al. 1995a; Ma-

RELAY

1377

jorossy and Kiss 1976; Morest 1975; Somogyi et al. 1978)
Here, too, although we know rather little about the specific
properties of these corticothalamic axons and generally have
limited knowledge about the properties of the cortical cells
from which they arise, it is reasonable to look for a closely
comparable range of functions for all of these axons in each
of the several major thalamic nuclei. For example, there is
evidence that, like the axons that pass to the lateral geniculate
nucleus, the cortical input to other thalamic nuclei is also
glutamatergic (Bromberg
et al. 198 1; Deschenes and Hu
1990; Fonnum et al. 1981; Fosse and Fonnum 1987; Giuffrida and Rustioni 1988; Hamori et al. 1990; Ray et al. 1992;
Young et al. 1983).
Although many corticothalamic axons are very like those
seen in the lateral geniculate nucleus, there are others that
do not fit this description and that, perhaps surprisingly, are
more like the primary afferent axons. Such corticothalamic
axons were first described on the basis of their electron
microscopical appearance by Mathers ( 1972) in the lateralis
posterior nucleus and the pulvinar of the squirrel monkey.
They since also have been seen in the same nuclei in squirrels
(Robson and Hall 1977)) macaque monkeys (Ogren and
Hendrickson
1979)) and mice (Hoogland et al. 199 1) and in
the mediodorsal nucleus (Schwartz et al. 199 1) of macaque
monkeys. They have relatively large terminals that end in
relation to large dendritic profiles, often in glomeruli and
forming triads.
Light microscopical
accounts have also shown, two distinct types of cortical afferent terminating in the thalamus:
coarser axons dominating in nuclei classically treated as association nuclei and finer ones in nuclei like the lateral geniculate nucleus or ventrobasal nucleus receiving the major
ascending pathways (Bourassa et al. 1995; Guillery 1967;
Hoogland et al. 1987; Ojima 1994; Rouiller and Welker
1991) . One type is relatively thin, having small terminal
boutons and also, apparently, giving collateral branches to
the reticular nucleus, like the corticogeniculate
axons described above. These originate in layer 6 and seem to innervate only dorsal thalamus and the thalamic reticular nucleus.
The other is thicker, having large terminal boutons like the
specific afferents and apparently giving no branches to the
reticular nucleus. The latter type, described by Bourassa et
al. ( 1995) for the rat, terminates with large endings in the
LP nucleus, and these form as branches of corticotectal axons
arising from layer 5 pyramidal cells of the somatosensory
cortex. Rouiller and Welker ( 199 1) described similar axons
arising from the auditory cortex and ending in the dorsal
division of the medial geniculate nucleus (see also Ojima
1994). It is interesting in this context that other primary
afferents, such as retinal afferents to the lateral geniculate
nucleus, also branch to innervate extrathalamic
extrathal amic targets but
do not innervate the thalamic reticular nucleus
nucle us (Boivie 1978,
1979; Bowling and Michael 1984; Sur et al. 1987; Tamamaki
et al. 1994).
These observations lead to conclusions that are briefly
outlined here, not because we believe that they have been
clearly established, but rather because they raise a number
of important questions
questio ns that readilv
readily now are accessible to
current experimental techniques.
The group of thalamic nuclei that were classically regarded as “association”
or secondary
nuclei, because
beta use

1378

S. M.

SHERMAN

AND

they project to so-called association cortex of the frontal,
parietal, and temporal lobes, have primary afferent pathways that have so far been poorly defined. Although it
has been established that the tectum and pretectum send
afferents to the LP/posterior
group (Berman 1977; Graham 1977; Graybiel and Berson 1980; Harting et al. 1980;
Uhlrich et al. 1991), and although some other afferent
pathways have been defined for the mediodorsal and the
laterodorsal nuclei (Jones 1985)) it is not clear that there
are significant ascending afferent systems to these nuclei
that are functionally
comparable with the primary afferents of the major relay nuclei. At first sight, this afferent
component seems to be absent for several of the classical
thalamic association nuclei.
The morphological observations summarized above about
corticothalamic axons that come from layer 5 pyramids suggest that these thicker axons may act as primary afferents
for some of the thalamic nuclei that have few if any other
primary afferent axons. Some indirect evidence in support
of this view comes from a consideration of the effects that
cortical lesions or inactivation have upon the receptive fields
of cells in the thalamic nuclei we are considering. For a
nucleus innervated by primary afferents such as the lateral
geniculate or the ventrobasal nucleus, cortical inactivation
has relatively little effect on the receptive fields of the thalamic cells (Baker and Malpeli 1977; Diamond et al. 1992;
Geisert et al. 1981; Kalil and Chase 1970; McClurkin
and
Marrocco 1984; McClurkin et al. 1994; Richard et al. 1975;
Schmielau and Singer 1977; Yuan et al. 1985). In contrast
to this, in the nuclei that receive layer 5 afferents (pulvinar
or the posterior group) from cortex, specific receptive field
properties are lost after the cortical afferents are inactivated
(Bender 1983; Diamond et al. 1992).
The possibility that significant cell groups in the thalamus receive their primary afferents from the cortex rather
than from lower centers and pass a record of this cortical
activity on to other cortical areas would give the thalamus
a role in corticocortical
communication
far beyond anything recognized in the current literature on corticocortical
interactions (e.g., DeYoe et al. 1994; Felleman and Van
Essen 1991; Kaas 1978, 1987; Knierim et al. 1992; Nakamura et al. 1993; Preuss et al. 1993; Rockland and Pandya
1981; Salin and Bullier 1995; Van Essen 1985; Van Essen
and Maunsell 1983; Van Essen et al. 1990, 1992; Young
1992; Zeki and Shipp 1988). We suggest that it is now
necessary to recognize at least two functionally
distinct
corticothalamic
systems. The first arises from layer 6 and
plays an important role in transforming
the firing properties of thalamic cells, whereas the other arises from layer
5 and provides a primary drive for thalamic cells in a
select group of thalamic nuclei. These latter thalamic cells
are probably under the influence of layer 6 cells as well
in much the same way as are geniculate and other thalamic
relay neurons, although in general, the evidence about the
cortical areas from which any one thalamic region receives
its layer 6 input still is defined poorly.
On the same basis, it is possible to recognize two types
of thalamic nucleus, one receiving its primary afferents from
noncortical sources and the second receiving its primary
afferents from cortical sources. The former have been called
first order relay nuclei and the latter, which receive their

R. W.

GUILLERY

FIG. 6.
Schematic representations
of a first order (FO) and higher order
(HO) thalamic relay, following
conventions
of Fig. 2. The first order circuit
is virtually
the same as that shown in Fig. 2, except that input from the
primary
afferent is shown as branching
to innervate
other subcortical
regions. The higher order circuit here is quite similar to that of first order
relay, with the chief difference relating to the cortical source of the afferent.
This afferent arises from pyramidal
cells in cortical layer 5. These corticothalamic axons share key features with the primary
afferent shown for the
first order relay: I ) many or all of them branch to innervate other subcortical
targets; 2) they do not innervate the thalamic reticular nucleus; 3) and they
innervate
the relay cells with large terminals
on proximal
dendrites.
See
text for further details.

primary afferent stimuli after at least one passage through
the thalamocortical pathways, have been called higher order
relay nuclei (Guillery 1995). Figure 6 schematically illustrates this concept.
This view of corticothalamic
afferents therefore recognizes not only that cortical areas can speak to each other
through the thalamus, with one thalamocortical pathway reporting to its own cortical area the major (layer 5) output
of another cortical area, it also recognizes that a variety of
cortical areas might then, through their layer 6 corticothalamic connections, modify this report of a cortical output as
this is passed through the thalamus.
The richness and complexity of such pathways, by means
of which the cerebral cortex as a whole can be kept informed
about its own activity, have been barely approached in what
we know about corticothalamic and thalamocortical connections. Given the extent to which the primary afferent activity
going to any known thalamic relay nucleus dominates the
functional properties of the cortical area to which that nucleus has its primary projection, one can anticipate that cortical areas receiving thalamic afferents from higher order relay
nuclei may well be dominated by that input rather than by the

THALAMIC

many connections that come directly and without
involvement from other cortical areas.
Local interneuronal

and reticular

thalamic

connections

The local connections established by thalamic interneurons vary considerably from one nucleus to another. Whereas
the interneurons form a prominent part of thalamic circuitry
in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat, there appear to
be no, or only very few, thalamic interneurons in the ventrobasal thalamic nucleus of the rat (Barbaresi et al. 1986;
Harris and Hendrickson
1987). Spreafico et al. (1993) recently have explored the extent to which the distribution of
interneurons varies from one species to another and from
one nucleus to another. Further, although the dendritic F
terminals of interneurons are a prominent part of the X cell
pathway in cats or in the lemniscal pathway of monkeys,
they are rare in the feline Y cell pathway or the macaque
spinothalamic tract (Hamos et al. 1987; Ralston and Ralston
1993; Wilson et al. 1984). Thus the role of interneurons
may vary greatly among various types of processing streams
through thalamus. It follows that the extent to which the
inhibitory influences that act upon the thalamocortical relay
depend upon thalamic reticular cells only or upon a combination of thalamic reticular cells and local interneurons must at
present be evaluated independently for each thalamic relay.
The reticular connections of the medial geniculate nucleus
and the ventrobasal complex appear to be very like those of
the lateral geniculate nucleus. Each of these thalamic cell
groups relates to one sector of the reticular nucleus, and in
each of these sectors, the reticulothalamic, thalamoreticular,
and corticoreticular pathways show the same pattern of GABAergic inhibitory and glutamatergic excitatory interconnections as seen for the lateral geniculate nucleus (e.g.,
Peschanski et al. 1983). Within the reticular nucleus itself,
these connections, like those in the visual sector, appear to
be mapped, so that local sign, relating to the frequency map
carried in the medial geniculate nucleus or to the map of
the body surface in the ventrobasal complex (Conley et al.
199 1; Crabtree 1992a,b; Hoogland et al. 1987)) is readily
recognizable within each of the relevant sectors. Similarly,
there is evidence for local sign in the connections of the
reticular nucleus with thalamocortical
pathways to motor
and cingulate cortex (Cicirata et al. 1990; Cornwall et al.
1990; Kiinzle 1976; Lozsjdi 1994, 1995; Stepniewska et al.
1994).
There are some thalamocortical pathways, however, that
connect to the reticular nucleus with little or no evidence of
any local sign. Conley and Diamond ( 1990) compared the
reticular connections of the pulvinar with those of the lateral
geniculate nucleus and found that both connect to the visual
sector of the reticular nucleus, the former to its medial third
and the latter to its lateral two-thirds.
They were able to
define a topographic mapping for the geniculate connections
of the reticular sector but were not able to do so for the
pulvinar connections. For the auditory pathways, Conley et
al. ( 199 I ) have described a comparable difference between
the reticular connections of the first order auditory relay
nucleus (the ventral part of the medial geniculate nucleus)
on the one hand and the higher order auditory relays (the
magnocellular and the posterior parts of the medial genicu-

RELAY

1379

late nucleus) on the other. Both project to the auditory sector
of the reticular nucleus but to different subdivisions of this
sector, and whereas a topographical map could be demonstrated for the first order relay nucleus, no such map could
be defined for the higher order nuclei. Crabtree ( 1996) has
comparable data for the reticular connections of the somatosensory pathways. He describes reticular cells that have a
mapped projection to the ventrobasal (first order) relay and
that have a projection with no evidence of local sign to the
higher order nucleus, the medial portion of the posterior
complex (Porn). In double label experiments, he finds many
individual reticular cells with axons that participate in both
of these strikingly different reticulothalamic pathways.
It is possible that there are maps in all of the pathways
to and from the reticular nucleus, but from the examples
cited above, it appears that for some of the higher order
relay nuclei the maps are either very elusive or nonexistent.
Recent evidence for the dorsomedial
thalamic nucleus
(Cornwall
and Phillipson 1988) suggests that this higher
order nucleus does have a definable map in the thalamic
reticular nucleus. The higher order nuclei may be concerned
with messages that bear no local sign or that have a completely different, currently undefined local sign.
The region of the ventral thalamus that forms the reticular
nucleus has, throughout its major sectors, a characteristic
latticework of criss-crossing
axons that run through it, which
gave rise to its original name (the Gitterkern, or latticenucleus) (see Berman and Jones 1977; Koelliker 1896). A
consideration of the pattern of connections formed between
the cerebral cortex and a thalamic nucleus: like the lateral
geniculate nucleus or the ventrobasal nucleus, demonstrates
that there has to be a.quite complex system of crossing axons
between the thalamus and the cortex. This is because each
of these thalamic nuclei relates by thalamocortical and corticothalamic axons to several cortical areas and one cortical
area can relate to several thalamic nuclei; both pathways
show divergence and convergence of connections and these
as well as the mirror reversals of cortical maps, like VI
and V2 relative to each other, necessarily must involve a
considerable amount of crossing of axons (Nelson and
LeVay 1985 ) . It is reasonable to regard the latticework
of
the reticular nucleus as the site of at least some of this
crossing. Nelson and LeVay ( 1985) showed that in cats
there is a crossing of geniculocortical axons in the subcortical white matter. Lozsidi et al. (1996) have found a crossing
of corticogeniculate axons in the region of the reticular nucleus. It is probable that early in development, both regions,
the region of the cortical subplate (Shatz et al. 1991) and
the region of the reticular and perireticular nuclei (Adams
and Guillery 1994; Mitrofanis and Guillery 1993) involve
some of these crossings. Perhaps corticothalamic axons cross
in one place and thalamocortical
axons in the other. The
key to understanding how different corticothalamocortical
circuits relate to each other within the reticular sectors of
the adult may well be found in the crossings that occur
during early development. The major point to be emphasized
here is that within any one sector of the reticular nucleus,
more than one cortical area is likely to be represented, and
the reticular representation of any one small part of a cortical
area is likely to be embedded within the complex lattice
work.

1380

S. M.

SHERMAN

AND

Within each functional sector of the reticular nucleus,
then, there is an opportunity for the several cortical areas
sharing a particular function, such as vision or hearing, to
relate to each other, possibly allowing any one member of
such a family of cortical areas to influence the way in which
a related cortical area may be acting through the thalamic
reticular nucleus upon either the first order thalamocortical
relay or one of the higher order relays. The complexity of the
connections that thus may be established within the reticular
nucleus between the corticoreticular
and thalamoreticular
pathways merit detailed study. It is the outcome of such
interactions that will be influencing the thalamic relays to
which the reticular cells themselves are projecting.
The reticular nucleus, in addition to its cortical afferents,
receives inputs from several other sources as well (e.g.,
cholinergic afferents from the parabrachial region and GABAergic ones from the pretectum and basal forebrain; see
Fig. 4) (see also Asanuma and Porter 1990; Bickford et al.
1993, 1994a). As pointed out above, most of these afferents
provide synaptic connections to the thalamus itself and also
to the reticular nucleus so that an adequate knowledge about
this nucleus may prove crucial to our understanding of how
the several different afferent pathways discussed in earlier
sections might act upon the thalamic relay cells.
Other agerent pathways
Other afferents to nongeniculate relays exist but will not
be dealt with here because information about them is relatively limited or else what is known does not add significantly to the arguments being presented here. However, it
is worth recording one point that may differentiate the visual
relay from other sensory and ascending relays. This is the
fact that for the visual relay, the lateral geniculate nucleus
and the superior colliculus represent the first station at which
cortical activity can act upon the retinofugal pathways. In
contrast to this, descending axons from the cortex have access to earlier relays for the auditory, somatosensory,
and
other systems (Brodal 1981) . That is, in these systems, the
cortex can modulate information in structures more peripheral than the thalamus or even the brain stem, whereas in
mammals the visual cortex cannot reach beyond the thalamus
to the retina. All subcortical modulation of the visual inputs
to cortex must occur at thalamic or collicular levels, and the
extent to which this may affect comparisons between the
geniculate and other thalamic relays is entirely unexplored.
INTRINSIC

CELL

PROPERTIES

Once we have a view of how synaptic contacts from various sources are distributed over the surface of a thalamic
cell, we need to consider what transmitters are released and
what receptors are activated by these afferent axon systems.
We also need to understand how the transmitter actions modify the conductances and consequently the transmembrane
currents of the postsynaptic cell and what part these may
play in relation to the generation of the impulse that eventually passes to the cortex. These problems form the focus of
this section, but a first step is to consider the extent to which
postsynaptic potentials are attenuated between their sites of
generation in the dendritic arbor and the site where they can
influence the outputs of the cell.

R. W. GUILLERY

Cable properties
In the case of relay cells and for inter-neurons that have
axons, we need to understand how synaptic potentials generated in the dendrites affect the soma or axon hillock, the site
where action potentials are generated. Also for interneurons,
we must understand how these synaptic potentials propagate
through the dendritic arbor to affect their dendritic, presynaptic outputs. To begin solving this problem, neurons may be
modeled as passive cables (Bloomfield and Sherman 1989;
Bloomfield et al. 1987; Jack et al. 1975; Rall 1977), and
the postsynaptic potentials can be thought of as conducting
electrotonically from dendritic sites toward the soma. More
recent evidence of active processes in dendrite makes this
assumption of simple electronic conduction more limited (see
below), but such modeling remains the chief linking hypothesis between cell shape, the distribution of synaptic inputs, and
the postsynaptic efficacy of these synapses.
When modeled as cables, geniculate relay cells appear
to be electrotonically compact, suggesting that postsynaptic
potentials even at the most distally located synaptic sites
will attenuate by less than half en route to the soma (Bloomfield and Sherman 1989; Bloomfield et al. 1987). Interneurons appear to be much larger electrotonically so that distal
synaptic inputs will not significantly affect the soma or the
axon if there is one. These distal inputs may instead act
locally only on the dendritic outputs formed there by the
presynaptic dendrites of the interneurons (for details, see
Bloomfield and Sherman 1989). The significance of this is
considered more fully below ( OTHER CONDUCTANCES
).
While useful, cable modeling is severely limited because
virtually all neurons, including thalamic neurons, do not simply
sum inhibitory and excitatory inputs in a passive and linear
fashion to produce an output (Llinas 1988; McCormick 1990;
McCormick
and Huguenard 1992; Sherman and Koch 1986,
1990; Steriade and Llinas 1988). Instead, the output of these
cells depends upon a variety of active membrane conductances
many of which are controlled by membrane voltage and others
of which are controlled by other factors, such as concentration
levels of Ca’+ ions. These conductances lead to transmembrane
currents, which can have quite dramatic effects on how a cell
responds to synaptic inputs.
Membrane conductances of relay cells
All relay cells have action potentials, which result from voltage-dependent Na’ and K+ conductances. Less well-known
conductances also occur that affect the firing properties of the
relay cells and thus alter the relay of information through thalamus. The major ones are considered below (for a more complete
description, see Llinas 1988; McCormick 1990; McCormick and
Huguenard 1992; Sherman and Koch 1986, 1990; Steriade and
Llinas 1988)
LOW

THRESHOLD

CA2+

AND

RELATED

CONDUCTANCES.

Apart from those underlying action potentials, these are the
most important conductances for relay cells. They control
which of two distinct response modes, tonic or burst,’ is
‘Tonic used in this sense refers to a response mode of a geniculate relay cell,
and here it is paired with burst. X and Y cells, the relay cell types found in the
A-laminae of the cat’s lateral geniculate nucleus, display both response modes.
This should not be confused with another, obsolete use of tonic when paired
with phasic to refer to a cell type: tonic for X and phasic for Y. Throughout
this account, tonic only will refer to response mode and not to cell type.

THALAMIC

operative when a thalamic relay cell responds to afferent
input (Crunelli et al. 1989; Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a,b; Lo
et al. 199 1; McCormick
and Feeser 1990). During the tonic
mode of firing, the neuronal response to a depolarizing input
is characterized by a steady stream of action potentials of
a frequency and duration that correspond fairly linearly to
stimulus strength and duration. During the burst mode, the
neuronal response to such an input consists of brief bursts
of action potentials separated by silent periods. It is worth
emphasizing that this bears no resemblance to the known
firing patterns of afferent inputs: for instance, retinogeniculate axons show no evidence of burst firing (Lo et al. 1991) .
The activation state of the low threshold Ca2’ conductance, which is ubiquitous in relay cells in all dorsal thalamic
nuclei of all mammals studied to date (Bal et al. 1995;
Crunelli et al. 1989; Deschenes et al. 1984; Jahnsen and
Llinas 1984a,b; Lo et al. 199 1; McCormick and Feeser 1990;
Scharfman et al. 1990)) is chiefly responsible for whether
the cell responds in tonic or burst mode: when the lowthreshold Ca2’ conductance is active, the cell responds in
burst mode, and when it is inactive, the cell responds in tonic
mode. The activation state itself is dependent on membrane
voltage, and the conductance can be activated at a low
threshold (i.e., from a more hyperpolarized level than the
threshold for activation of conventional action potentials).
When activated, it produces a low threshold spike (Bal et
al. 1995; Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a,b; Lo et al. 199 1; McCormick and Feeser 1990; Scharfman et al. 1990). Figure 7,
A- C, illustrates its voltage dependency. The underlying conductance is inactivated by membrane depolarizations more
positive than about -60 mV (Fig. 7, A and B), but it is
deinactivated at more hyperpolarized levels from which it
can be activated by a suitably large depolarization (Fig. 7C),
such as an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP). The
membrane current resulting from the low threshold Ca2’
conductance is known as the T current, because it represents
an influx of Ca2+ ions via membrane pores known as T
channels. This influx leads to a largely all-or-none, spikelike depolarization due to Ca2’ entry. This is the low-threshold spike. Thus the low-threshold
Ca2+ conductance, lowthreshold spike, and T current all refer to closely related
phenomena.
The large depolarization associated with the low-threshold
spike produces, at its peak, a high frequency burst of conventional (i.e., Na’/K+)
action potentials. Between the lowthreshold spikes, action potentials are rare, and thus the cell
is relatively silent between the bursts of action potentials
riding the crests of the low-threshold
spikes. The low-threshold spike provides an amplification that permits a hyperpolarized cell to generate action potentials in response to a
moderate EPSP. However, because of the largely all-ornone, spike-like depolarization resulting from the Ca2+ conductance, the amplification is nonlinear. As noted above, at
depolarized levels during tonic mode firing, the neuronal
response is characterized by a steady stream of action potentials of a frequency and duration that corresponds fairly linearly to stimulus strength and duration. In other words, tonic
firing represents a relatively linear transformation
between
stimulus and response, whereas burst firing represents a more
nonlinear transformation.
Activation of the low-threshold
spike is rapidly followed

RELAY

1381

A =-55 mv

C : -7omv
FIG. 7.
Tonic and burst firing modes for lateral geniculate nucleus neuron from cat. Cell was recorded intracellu larly in an in vitro slice preparation
and was held at different
initial membrane
voltages as shown by adjusting
current injected i nto the cell through recording
electrode. Each of the three
top traces shows response to same depolarizing
0.3 nA c urrent pulse (bottom) injected into the cell, also via recording
electrode. A : tonic response.
When the cell is relatively
depolarized
( -55 mV), the current injection
produces a membrane depolarization
sufficient to evoke a stream of conventional action potentials.
B: no response. At a middle level of polarization
(-60
mV), the injected current pulse depolarizes
the cell insufficiently
to
evoke action potentials,
resulting
in a purely ohmic response.
C: burst
response. When the cell is relatively
hyperpolarized
( -70 mV), the same
depolarizing
pulse now triggers a low-threshold
Ca2 + spike. Ridi ng the
crest of this low-threshold
Ca2+ spike is a burst of 2 conventional
action
potentials (number
of action potentials in the burst can vary up to - 10).
Low-threshold
Ca2+ spike has a voltage dependency
that prevents it from
being activated from the more depolarized
levels of A and B (see text for
details).

by repolarization of the membrane to its former, hyperpolarized level by the rapid inactivation of the T current. In addition, there is an activation of various K’ conductances, including one that is voltage dependent and one that is activated by the Ca2+ entry that occurs during the low-threshold
spike. This repolarization serves partially to deinactivate the
low-threshold
spike, but there is also a time dependency
for deinactivation: complete deinactivation requires that the
hyperpolarization
be maintained, generally for 2 100 ms.
Under normal conditions, this limits the frequency with
which low-threshold
spikes can be evoked.
A conductance that is activated by membrane hyperpolarization and inactivated by depolarization often is associated
with the low-threshold
Ca2’ conductance. This hyperpolarization-activated cation conductance, leads, via influx of cations, to a depolarizing current, which is called the h current
(McCormick
and Pape 1990). Activation is slow, with a
time constant of >200 ms. The combination of T current,

1382

S. M.

SHERMAN

AND

the above-mentioned K+ conductances, and h current can
lead to rhythmic bursting, which often is seen in recordings
from in vitro slice preparations of thalamus. Hyperpolarizing
a cell will activate the h current but so slowly that the T
current fully deinactivates. Once the h current is activated,
it will depolarize the cell, thereby activating the T current.
This, in turn, inactivates both the h and T currents while
activating K’ conductances, resulting in repolarization. The
cycle then repeats. This leads to prolonged rhythmic bursting, typically at 3- 10 Hz for the low-threshold
spikes. This
bursting can be interrupted only by a sufficiently strong and
prolonged depolarization to produce tonic firing, and appropriate membrane voltage shifts can effectively switch the
cell between rhythmic bursting and tonic firing.
These associated conductances have been most thoroughly
studied in vitro, and the following relationships can be proposed on the basis of these studies. When the cell is depolarized, it fires in tonic mode. When hyperpolarized,
it fires
in burst mode, which is always characterized by rhythmic
bursting. Random bursting is not possible according to this
proposal. Switching between these two modes is effected by
changing membrane potential. It has been suggested that the
burst mode also is inevitably associated with rhythmic firing
rather than random bursting in more physiological in vivo
conditions (McCormick
and Bal 1994; McCormick
and
Feeser 1990; Steriade and Llinas 1988; Steriade et al. 1993))
but as we show below, this is not strictly correct.
This current is present in most neurons of the
central nervous system (Adams 1982; McCormick
1991;
Wogawski 1985; Storm 1990). It is due to a voltage-dependent K+ conductance, which has a similar voltage dependency to the T current, with similar activation and inactivation curves. Thus the A current is inactivated at depolarized
membrane potentials and activated by a depolarization from
a hyperpolarized membrane potential. Note one important
distinction between the T and A currents: the T current is
carried by Ca’+ , which flows into the cell and depolarizes
it, whereas the A current is carried by K+, which flows out
ofthe cell and thereby hyperpolarizes it. When the T current
is activated by a small depolarization, it produces a large,
depolarizing Ca *+ spike, which, as noted above, can be
viewed as a nonlinear amplification of the activating depolarization. When the A current is activated, it hyperpolarizes
the cell, which tends to offset the original, activating depolarization. The result is a slowing down of the initial depolarization with a delay and reduced frequency of action potentials.
It is not clear what function the A current serves. One
suggestion (e.g., Adams 1982; Rogawski 1985; Storm 1990)
is that it serves to extend the dynamic range of input/output
relationships for neurons by limiting firing frequency. This
would prevent the cell from reaching response saturation
with low stimulus strength and allows it to signal the presence of stronger stimuli.
Whatever the purpose of the A current, which can be
clearly demonstrated in thalamic relay cells under the controlled but artificial conditions of in vitro recording, it is
rarely activated in these cells under more normal conditions.
This is because of its interaction with the T current (Pape
et al. 1994). Even though both conductances have similar
voltage dependencies, they are not precisely the same. For
A CURRENT.

R.

W.

GUILLERY

most relay cells, the activation and inactivation curves of
the T current lie 2 10 mV hyperpolarized
with respect to
those of A current (Pape et al. 1994). This means that,
when a cell is hyperpolarized
sufficiently to deinactivate
both currents and is then depolarized, the T current will
activate before the A current, and the resultant spike-like
depolarization will rapidly inactivate the A current before it
has a chance to develop. There is a narrow window of membrane voltage in which the T current is largely inactivated
and the A current is largely deinactivated, and depolarization
that occurs within this limited membrane voltage range will
activate the A current but not the T current.
OTHER CONDUCTANCES.
Another Na+ conductance, in addition to that responsible for the conventional action potential, exists for thalamic relay cells (Jahnsen and Llinas
1984a). This other Naf conductance, which is activated by
a strong depolarization, is persistent and noninactivating,
creating a plateau depolarization. When activated, it promotes sustained, tonic firing. Likewise,
in addition to the
Ca*+ conductance underlying the T current, there is one with
a much higher threshold that is most likely located in the
dendrites (Hernandez-Cruz
and Pape 1989; Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a) ; rather little is known about this Ca*’ conductance. A number of K+ conductances (e.g., such as those
leading to the spike afterhyperpolarization)
exist in addition
to those described above. These hyperpolarize the neuron
for varying lengths of time following a conventional action
potential. The amount of this hyperpolarization
determines
the relative refractory period of the cell, limiting its maximum firing rate.
Membrane

conductances

of’. interneurons
Interneurons, presumably because of their relatively small
size, are much more difficult to record than are relay cells,
and until recently, functional criteria to distinguish interneurons from relay cells during recording were lacking. Several
such criteria now exist, especially for the in vitro preparation
(Pape and McCormick
1988, 1995; Pape et al. 1994). However, except for these very recent experiments, few physiological data have been published regarding interneurons, and
much less is known about their membrane properties.
ACTION
POTENTIALS.
The important issue as to whether all
thalamic interneurons exhibit action potentials was discussed
above (AFFERENTS
FROM
LOCAL
GENICULATE
INTERNEURONS).
As we have noted earlier, it is possible that axonless
interneurons exist and that these do not fire action potentials,
but clearly some (if not all) possess axonal outputs and fire
action potentials (Bloomfield and Sherman 1989; Hamos et
al. 1985; Montero 1987). In any case, the massive output
from presynaptic dendritic terminals could be discharged
either with or without an action potential.
T AND A CURRENTS.
Until recently, it was thought that,
unlike relay cells, interneurons did not possess a T current. A
recent analysis, however, shows that interneurons do indeed
possess both T and A currents (Pape et al. 1994). However,
subtle differences between cell types in their relative voltage
dependencies causes the A current to obscure the T current
in interneurons. This seems to be the opposite of the situation
in relay cells, for which different voltage dependencies cause
the T current to obscure the A current (see A CURRENT ).

THALAMIC

INTEGRATION
IN INTERNEURONS.
Not only is
there a problem relating the membrane properties of interneurons to their morphological characteristics,
but there is
an even bigger problem understanding how the interneurons
function in thalamic circuits. Unlike relay cells, which integrate synaptic inputs and membrane properties to produce a
unified output via a single axon, interneurons may possess
two quite distinct types of output. One is the axon, and the
other is the dendritic terminal found distally on all parts of
the dendritic arbor. As noted above, these dendritic outputs
are both presynaptic, to dendrites of relay cells, and postsynaptic, mostly to axons from retina, brain stem, and other
GABAergic
neurons (e.g., other interneurons or reticular
neurons). Cable modeling suggests that the dendritic terminals form clusters that are electrotonically isolated from each
other and from the soma and axon (Bloomfield and Sherman
1989). This suggests that the interneuron integrates synaptic
input via two different and independent routes: a conventional route involving proximal inputs playing out through
the axon and a nonconventional route involving the dendritic
terminals, which may involve many local, independent circuits.
Thus the dendritic terminals, which are the major output of
the interneuron, may be effectively isolated from the soma.
Because recordings of interneurons generally are made from
the soma, it follows that such recordings will not reveal the
integrative properties of this synaptic route through interneurons. Our limited knowledge of membrane properties of interneurons, derived from soma recordings only, therefore
may relate only to the axonal output. This output may be
minor and, as noted above, may not even exist on many
interneurons. Clearly we need a way to investigate the synaptic and integrative properties as they relate to the dendritic
terminals before we can begin to understand the role played
by interneurons in thalamic functioning.
SYNAPTIC

PROPERTIES

OF

SYNAPTIC

INPUTS

Relay cells

RELAY

lar effects through second messenger systems, and this can
even lead to effects on more than one set of ion channels.
However,
ionotropic receptors also may produce second
messenger effects that can be triggered by influx of certain
ions (e.g., Ca2+), even though the postsynaptic potential
itself is evoked in a direct manner.
INPUTS
FROM
INTERNEURONS
RETICULAR
NUCLEUS.
Both

AND

CELLS

OF

THE

THALAMIC

interneurons and reticular cells
use y-aminobutyric
acid (GABA)
as a neurotransmitter.
They are thus said to be ‘ ‘GABAergic’
’ . Transmitters should
no longer be classified as excitatory or inhibitory, because
it is known that the same neurotransmitter
can be both excitatory and inhibitory depending on the postsynaptic receptor
(see below for examples), However, based on the available
evidence, GABA seems to act in the thalamus in an inhibitory manner. Relay cells thus exhibit inhibitory postsynaptic
potentials when inputs from either interneurons or reticular
cells are activated. These potentials are generated through
two different receptors, known as GABA*,
which is ionotropic, and GABAs,
which is metabotropic
(Crunelli and
Leresche 1991; Crunelli et al. 1988; Soltesz and Crunelli
1992).
The GABA* response involves opening a Cl channel,
which inhibits the cell not so much by hyperpolarization
(the reversal potential for Cl - is only about -70 mV) as
via a large decrease in neuronal input resistance that serves
to shunt any excitatory postsynaptic potentials. The GABAR
response involves opening a K+ channel, which more
strongly hyperpolarizes the cell toward the K+ reversal potential of roughly - 100 mV with less effect on input resistance. The GABA* response is typically faster than is the
GABAR response. Interneurons and reticular cells can provide three different types of input to the relay cell: axonal
from the reticular cells, axonal from the interneurons, and
dendritic from the interneurons. It is not clear how, if at all,
GABA, and GABAn receptors correlate with these different
sources of GABAergic input but the relationship could prove
to be functionally significant.
FROM
RETINAL
AXONS.
Retinal afferents to the lateral geniculate nucleus use an excitatory amino acid (probably glutamate) as a neurotransmitter,
and relay cells respond
to this with a variety of ionotropic receptors ( see Fig. 8).
These can be divided into two main types (Hartveit and
Heggelund 1990; Heggelund and Hartveit 1990; Kemp and
Sillito 1982; Kwon et al. 1991; Moody and Sillito 1988;
Scharfman et al. 1990; Sillito et al. 1990): N-methyl-Daspartate (NMDA)
and cr-amino-3-hydroxy-5methyl-4isoxazolepropionic
acid (AMPA).
Activation of the AMPA receptors produces a prototypical, fast excitatory postsynaptic potential because of entry
of Nat and perhaps other cations. The response associated
with NMDA-receptor
activation is unusual for three reasons.
First, it has a voltage dependency so that the more hyperpolarized the cell, the less that receptor activation yields an
EPSP. This is because the ion channel attached to the NMDA
receptor becomes clogged with Mg2+ ions, preventing influx
of cations to depolarize the cell (Kawajiri
and Dingledine
1993; Mayer and Westbrook 1987). Prior depolarization of
the cell prevents this Mg2+ block, and then activation of the
NMDA receptor produces an EPSP. This EPSP is slower
INPUTS

As seen in Fig. 4, geniculate relay cells receive synaptic
inputs from numerous sources. How these interact with one
another and with the intrinsic properties of the relay cells
largely determines how the cell responds to and thus relays
retinal inputs. In recent years, a great deal has been learned
about the pharmacology and physiology of the main inputs
illustrated in Fig. 4. Of particular importance is the identification of neurotransmitters
and postsynaptic receptors. Figure 8 illustrates these for the best understood inputs to relay
cells of the lateral geniculate nucleus. Many postsynaptic
receptors on relay cells are ionotropIc, which means that the
neurotransmitter binding to the receptor acts in a fairly direct
fashion through a conformational change in the receptor to
open a specific ion channel. Flow of ions into or out of the
cell through these channels leads to the evoked postsynaptic
potential. Some receptors are metabotropic, which means
that they operate on the ion channels indirectly through second messenger pathways.
Ionotropic receptors usually are associated with faster
postsynaptic responses than are metabotropic ones. Also,
metabotropic receptor activation often produces other cellu-

1383

1384

S. M. SHERMAN

AND R. W. GLJILLERY

from cortex

to cortex

Glu: 4
OAMPA

l

NMDA

betabotropic

LOG.8. Schematic diagram of postsynaptic receptors activated on relay cells of lateral geniculate nucleus from retinal,
cortical, and parabrachial inputs.

ACh: 6
q nicotinic
n muscarinic

‘i.;
“‘-$,
(Ml)

3*.‘” i
”I

than that produced by activation of the AMPA receptor.
Second, although NMDA receptors are ionotropic, their activation involves considerable influx of Ca2+ , which can, in
turn, activate certain second messenger pathways providing
other postsynaptic effects. For instance, such a process is
thought to play a role in long-term potentiation in hippocampal cells, a phenomenon shown to depend on NMDA receptors. It is not clear what role if any such a phenomenon
might have in the geniculate relay. Third, activation of
NMDA receptors requires the presence of glycine in addition
to glutamate because of a strychnine-independent
glycine
site generally associated with the NMDA receptor (Johnson
and Ascher 1987; Kleckner and Dingledine 1988; Mayer
and Westbrook 1987; Mayer et al. 1989; Thomson et al.
1989). This is odd and remains a mystery, because no known
source of glycinergic input to geniculate relay cells has yet
been discovered. One could argue that metabolic levels of
glycine present in the neuropil are sufficient to activate the
glycine receptor, but how is this level modulated to affect
the NMDA response, and if it is not modulated, why bother
to evolve a receptor to an invariant substance?
Clearly, this arrangement of glutamatergic receptors on
relay cells can strongly affect the nature of geniculate gating.
If the relay cell is sufficiently hyperpolarized at the time of
retinogeniculate input, the NMDA response is reduced, being more reduced with further initial hyperpolarization, and
the AMPA response will dominate. This will not only influence the temporal properties of the relay, because the AMPA
response is considerably faster than is that of the NMDA
receptor, but NMDA activation also can lead to other effects
due to activation of second messenger pathways. Any input
that affects membrane potential of the relay cell can control
the mix of NMDA and AMPA responses, and this could
conceivably apply to any of the inputs to these cells illus-

trated in Fig. 4. This control can be exerted not only by
nonretinal inputs, but also by the pattern of retinal inputs
from visual stimulation, which also could be important, because a brief interlude of action potentials might be inadequate to depolarize the relay cell sufficiently to produce an
NMDA response, but a more prolonged barrage might
do so.
The postsynaptic receptors activated by retinal axons on
interneurons have not yet been clearly documented.
AXONS.
Corticogeniculate
synapses appear to activate the same types of AMPA and
NMDA ionotropic glutamate receptors as are activated by
retinogeniculate synapses, but because of the very different
locations of their synaptic inputs upon the dendritic arbor,
these different synaptic populations presumably do not activate the same individual glutamate receptors. In addition to
the ionotropic glutamate receptors, corticogeniculate synapses activate a metabotropic glutamate receptor on relay
cells (see Fig. 8)) a receptor type not activated via retinal
inputs (McCormick and Von Krosigk 1992). Activation of
this metabotropic receptor mobilizes a second messenger
pathway that ultimately leads to reduction in a I(+ “leak”
conductance. Reducing this conductance depolarizes the cell,
and the resultant EPSP is quite slow and long lasting, much
more so than is the EPSP associated with the ionotropic
NMDA receptors, even the NMDA receptor.
The implications of the mix of AMPA and NMDA receptors activated from cortex are similar to those that apply to
the receptors activated from the retina, and the metabotropic
glutamate receptor adds another dimension to corticogeniculate function. Activation of the metabotropic receptor produces the slowest and longest lasting response, that of the
AMPA receptor is the fastest and briefest, and that of the
INPUTS FROM CORTICAL

THALAMIC

NMDA receptor is intermediate. The slower responses, especially via the metabotropic receptor, would be better able to
maintain more sustained changes in membrane voltage of
relay cells. This could be quite important in allowing cortex
to exert control over voltage-dependent
conductances expressed by these relay cells. The slow response, however,
would act like a low-pass temporal filter in transferring information across the synapse so that specific firing patterns in
the cortical afferents would not be imposed on the relay
cells. In contrast, EPSPs evoked via AMPA receptors would
be faster and perhaps permit transfer of these firing patterns,
but it would be less suitable for sustaining changes in membrane voltage.
These corticogeniculate
axons also innervate both interneurons and reticular cells, but the postsynaptic receptors
activated on these cells are not completely known, although
recent evidence suggests a lack of metabotropic glutamate
receptors on interneurons (Pape and McCormick
1995).
In cats, most of the input to the lateral geniculate nucleus from the brain stem
derives from cholinergic neurons in the midbrain and pontine
tegmentum surrounding the brachium conjunctivum (Bickford et al. 1993; de Lima and Singer 1987b; Fitzpatrick et
al. 1989; Pare et al. 1988; Raczkowski
and Fitzpatrick 1989;
Smith et al. 1988). This brain stem area thus is known as
the parabrachial region. As is summarized by Figs. 4 and 8,
activation of this input produces an excitatory postsynaptic
potential due primarily to activation of two different receptors (McCormick
1989; McCormick
and Prince 1987). The
first is an ionotropic nicotinic receptor that produces a fast
EPSP by permitting influx of cations. The second is a metabotropic muscarinic receptor, an Ml type, that triggers a second messenger pathway ultimately leading to a reduction in
a K+ conductance. This muscarinic response is a very slow,
long-lasting EPSP. It seems remarkably similar to the metabotropic glutamate response seen from activation of corticogeniculate input (see above), and the possibility exists that
both metabotropic receptors may be linked to the same second messenger pathway and IV channels.
In addition to acetylcholine (ACh), these axons appear
to colocalize NO (Bickford et al. 1993)) a neurotransmitter
or neuromodulator
with a widespread
distribution in the
brain (Bredt and Snyder 1992; Schuman and Madison 1991,
1994; Snyder 1992). Relatively little is known concerning
the action of NO in the lateral geniculate nucleus, but recent
studies suggest that its release from parabrachial terminals
serves two possible roles: to switch response mode from
burst to tonic (Pape and Mager, 1992), perhaps complementing the role of ACh in this regard, and to promote the
generation of NMDA responses from retinal inputs (Cudeiro
et al. 1994a,b, 1996).

INPUT

FROM

PARABRACHIAL

AXONS.

INPUTS.
Other sparse inputs to the lateral geniculate
nucleus are shown in Fig. 4 and include noradrenergic axons
from cells in the parabrachial region, serotonergic axons
from cells in the dorsal raphe nucleus, GABAergic
axons
from cells from the pretectum, and histaminergic axons from
cells in the tuberomammilary
nucleus of the hypothalamus
(see above for details). Noradrenalin seems to increase excitability of relay cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus and,
like ACh, promote tonic firing (Funke et al. 1993: McCor-

OTHER

RELAY

1385

mick 1992; Pape and McCormick
1989). Effects of serotonin are complex. Iontophoresis onto relay cells in vivo generally inhibits them, but in vitro studies suggest that this is
the consequence of direct excitation that is stronger for local
GABAergic cells than for relay cells (see below and McCormick 1992). Although pretectal axons innervate the lateral
geniculate nucleus, morphological evidence from cats suggests that they might innervate mainly interneurons and not
relay cells (Cucchiaro et al. 1993). Interestingly, Feig and
Harting ( 1994) provide analogous data from the Galago,
from which they conclude pretectal afferents form inhibitory
contacts in the lateral geniculate nucleus, and these frequently form onto interneurons, although relay cells also
receive such innervation. Finally, histamine application to
relay cells generally excites them (McCormick
1992).
Inputs to interneurons

and reticular

cells

Relatively few recordings have been made from interneurons and reticular cells. Retinal axons, which innervate the
former but not the latter (see Fig. 4)) produce EPSPs in
interneurons (Ahlsen et al. 1985; Friedlander et al. 198 1;
Lindstriim
1982). The receptors underlying this have not
been identified unambiguously but, based on shape of the
evoked EPSPs, are likely to be ionotropic glutamate receptors. However, as noted above, recordings of interneurons
may directly reveal inputs to the soma and proximal dendrites only, and we have indicated that many afferents primarily contact peripheral dendritic processes.
Activation of the cholinergic inputs from the parabrachial
region generally inhibits interneurons
and reticular cells
(Ahlsen et al. 1984; McCormick
1992; McCormick
and Pape
1988; McCormick
and Prince 1986, 1987). This is interesting, because individual parabrachial axons branch to innervate these cells as well as relay cells, and, as noted above,
these axons excite relay cells. This is accomplished by yet
another type of muscarinic receptor, a type other than Ml,
that dominates on these GABAergic
targets (Hu et al.
1989a,b; McCormick,
1989; McCormick
and Prince 1986,
1987). Activation of this receptor increases a K+ conductance, leading to hyperpolarization.
However, cells of the
thalamic reticular nucleus also respond to this cholinergic
input with another, nicotinic receptor that leads to fast depolarization (Lee and McCormick
1995 ) . Nonetheless, the
main effect of cholinergic stimulation of these cells seems
dominated by the muscarinic, inhibitory response (Dingledine and Kelly 1977; Hu et al. 1989a,b; McCormick
and
Prince 1987). Because these interneurons and reticular cells
inhibit relay cells, activation of this cholinergic pathway thus
disinhibits relay cells. Nothing is as yet known about the
action of NO on these local, GABAergic cells.
Noradrenalin depolarizes reticular cells by reducing a K+
conductance (McCormick
1992; McCormick
and Wang
1991)) but has no clear effect on interneurons (Pape and
McCormick
1995 ) . Serotonin depolarizes reticular cells by
blocking a K+ conductance (McCormick
1992; McCormick
and Wang 1991), and it produces a slight depolarization of
some interneurons, not clearly affecting others (Pape and
McCormick
1995 ) . Histamine depolarizes interneurons but
apparently through unknown presynaptic mechanisms and
not through any direct effect on these cells (Pape and

1386

S. M.

SHERMAN

AND

McCormick
1995). It should be noted that these observations of effects on interneurons represent recording from the
cell body and axon and thus may be limited to axonal output
without reflecting effects on dendritic output (see above).
We can assume the GABAergic input from pretectum inhibits its targets, which include reticular cells, interneurons, and
probably relay cells (Cucchiaro et al. 1993; Feig and Harting
1994). Finally, the GABAergic pathway from the basal forebrain to the thalamic reticular nucleus likely inhibits these
cells, but we have noted above that this pathway does not
directly innervate the lateral geniculate nucleus (Bickford et
al. 1994a).
FUNCTION
MODES

IN

OF BURST
AND
TONIC
THE
THALAMOCORTICAL

RESPONSE
RELAY

We have seen that thalamocortical relay cells display two
response modes, burst and tonic, that depend upon the activation state of the low-threshold
Ca2’ spike. Studies from in
vitro slice preparations suggest that the burst mode implies
rhythmic bursting that functionally disconnects the relay cell
from its first order afferent input and interrupts the relay.
This is because the rhythmic bursting is based on intrinsic
cellular and local circuit properties and fails to reflect the
pattern of retinal inputs impinging on the lateral geniculate
relay cell. This view further suggests that faithful relay takes
place only during the tonic firing mode. These modes thus
appear to represent a state dependent switching on and off
of the relay through the lateral geniculate nucleus. Inputs
that affect membrane potential can readily switch relay cells
between modes by inactivating or deinactivating the lowthreshold spike.
The first in vivo studies of the response modes in cats
demonstrated that, when the animal entered certain phases
of sleep, thalamic relay cells began to burst rhythmically
and that such rhythmic bursting was not seen during awake,
alert states (Livingstone
and Hubel 198 1; McCarley et al.
1983; Steriade and Contreras 1995; Steriade and McCarley
1990; Steriade et al. 1993 ) . This led to the hypothesis that
awake animals have depolarized thalamocortical cells that
operate strictly in tonic mode and thus faithfully relay information to cortex; during certain sleep phases, the cells become hyperpolarized and thus burst rhythmically, which prevents relay of information to cortex. Studies of visual response properties of relay cells in the lateral geniculate
nucleus of cats suggest that this view, although correct as
far as it goes, is incomplete. Recent data, reviewed in the
following paragraphs, indicate that both tonic and burst response modes normally are used by geniculate relay cells to
transmit visual information to cortex.
Visual responses

of geniculate

relay cells

If the burst mode represents a complete failure of the relay
through thalamus, it follows that, in vivo, a geniculate relay
cell sufficiently
hyperpolarized
to deinactivate its lowthreshold spike should either remain silent or begin bursting
rhythmically,
whether in the presence of a visual stimulus
or during spontaneous activity. Recording from lightly anesthetized cats in vivo shows that cells in burst mode rarely, but
occasionally, fire rhythmically during spontaneous activity;

R. W. GUILLERY

more commonly, they fire instead during spontaneous activity with randomly occurring bursts. Also, such cells respond
quite reliably to visual stimuli, except that the response is
in the form of bursts riding the crests of low-threshold
spikes
rather than streams of unitary action potentials that occur
during depolarization and in the tonic mode (Guido et al.
1992, 1995; Mukherjee and Kaplan 1995). These bursts
follow the temporal properties of the visual stimulation
rather than any intrinsic pacemaker frequency. Recent but
preliminary evidence suggests that the same response properties can be seen in awake, behaving cats (Guido and Weyand 1995).
Because geniculate cells respond to visual stimuli in either
tonic or burst mode, and these modes represent different
types of stimulus/response
transformation (cf. Fig. 7)) these
response modes almost certainly represent different forms
of relay of visual information to cortex. Figure 9 illustrates
the key differences in how a cell responds to visual stimuli
during tonic and burst response modes (see also Guido et
al. 1995 ) and shows that the cell does respond quite vigorously to the visual stimulus while in burst mode. These
response characteristics
suggest two differences between
tonic and burst mode.
First, tonic mode displays much greater linear summation
than does burst mode. When applied to visually evoked responses such as those shown in Fig. 9, the response profile
of a cell with good linear summation will correlate well with
differing visual stimuli. Thus the sinusoidal response profile
during tonic mode firing reflects a linear transformation between the visual stimulus, which is a drifting sinusoidal
grating, and the response. In contrast, the response profile
during burst mode firing reflects a nonlinear distortion of
the sinusoidal stimulus. This very likely results from the
nonlinear amplification of the low-threshold
spike, which
provides a similar response regardless of the amplitude or
duration of any suprathreshold stimulus (see above). These
impressions have been confirmed by Fourier analysis of the
responses of the cells during the two response modes (Guido
et al. 1992, 1995) and also by analysis of responses to Aashing spots (Mukherjee and Kaplan 1995 ) . It should be noted
that the difference in spontaneous activity contributes to the
difference of the responses, because the higher level during
tonic mode helps to prevent nonlinearities due to half-wave
rectification in the response.
Second, the lower spontaneous activity during burst mode
coupled with vigorous visual responsiveness
during either
mode (Guido et al. 1995) suggests the possibility that the
ratio between signal (visual response) and noise (spontaneous activity) actually is improved during burst mode. This,
in turn, suggests that cells in burst mode might be more
capable of detecting a stimulus than when in tonic mode.
This possibility has been tested formally by using techniques
of signal detection theory to create receiver operating characteristic curves for responses during tonic and burst mode;
these curves test the ability of the cell to detect a visual
stimulus against background noise (Green and Swets 1966;
Macmillan and Creelman 199 1) . Every geniculate cell so
tested displays considerably better detection of the visual
stimuli when in burst mode than when in tonic mode (Guido
et al. 1995). Furthermore the more difficult a stimulus is to
detect (e.g., stimuli of lower contrast), the greater the detec-

THALAMIC

A:

TONICMODE(-65mv)
Spontaneous

B:

Activity

z

0

60

Ia
m

50

1387

BURSTMODE(-75
Spontaneous

Visual Response

Ia
VI

RELAY

Activity

Visual Response

40

mv>

FIG. 9.
Spontaneous
activity
and visually driven responses of geniculate
cell recorded in a cat in vivo during tonic and
burst modes. The cell was recorded intracellularly,
and current injection
was used to
adjust mean membrane
voltage
to either
-65 mV, which was sufficiently
depol arized
to inactivate
T current and promote
tonic
responses,
or -75 mV, which was sufficiently hyperpolarized
to deinactivate
T current, allowing it to be activated and promote
burst responses.
Top: histograms
show
spontaneous
activity;
bottom : responses
shown to 4 cycles of a sinusoidal
grating
drifted
through
receptive
field. A : tonic
mode; B: burst mode.

TIME (set)
tion advantage of the burst over the tonic mode. This is
because a less salient stimulus would produce a smaller responseduring tonic mode, but such a stimulus, if detectable,
would provide nearly the same responseduring burst mode
as would a more salient stimulus.
Besides the differences in linear summation and signal
detection, responsemode has an effect on temporal tuning
(Mukherjee and Kaplan 1995). Geniculate neurons firing in
tonic mode respondto a broad range of temporal frequencies,
whereas those in burst mode respond to a much narrower
range. In engineering terms, cells in tonic mode behave as
low-pass temporal filters, whereas those in burst mode act
as band-pass filters. Differences are particularly striking at
low temporal frequencies, to which cells in tonic mode respond much better.
It thus seemsclear that both response modes efficiently
relay visual information to cortex. Burst mode is better for
initial detection of stimuli. This may be effective during
visual search when the less accurate analysis permitted by
the nonlinear responsesis nonetheless sufficient for target
acquisition. It also may be useful when attention is directed
elsewhere (e.g., to another part of visual spaceor to another
sensory modality) asa sort of “wake-up” call for novel and
potentially interesting or dangerous stimuli. This notion is
in many ways similar to the “searchlight” hypothesis for
burst firing first advanced by Crick ( 1984) in relation to
the possible function of the thalamic reticular nucleus in
attention. However, the nonlinear distortion associatedwith
burst mode suggeststhat, although the stimulus can be detected readily, it will not be as accurately analyzed while
the relay is in this mode. Tonic mode, with its more linear
relay of visual information, would permit more faithful signal analysis. The differences between these responsemodes
in temporal tuning (Mukherjee and Kaplan 1995) are also

consistent with this hypothesis, becausethe low-pass tuning
during tonic mode would respond well to lower temporal
frequencies that result from stimuli being tracked and thus
fixed fairly stably on the retina, which would be expected
for stimuli analyzed in detail. Sudden changes in the visual
world (e.g., the appearance of a novel stimulus) or visual
search would not have much representation of low temporal
frequencies, so if cells in burst mode are concerned with such
tasks, they need not be sensitive to these lower frequencies.
Control of response mode
We can suggestfrom the above that geniculate relay cells
switch between tonic and burst firing modes depending on
the requirements of the visual system regarding signal detection or analysis. For this to be plausible, there must be a
ready means for nonretinal inputs to control these response
modes. This may be accomplished through effects on the
membrane potential of relay cells, becausethe low-threshold
Ca*’ conductance underlying the burst mode is voltage dependent, but other factors as noted below also could contribute to controlling response mode. Evidence does exist that
both parabrachial and cortical inputs can do this.
Electrical activation of the parabrachial region in vivo
causes dramatic switching of geniculate relay cells from
burst to tonic mode (Lu et al. 1993). Likewise, in vitro
application of ACh, the chief transmitter used by parabrachial inputs to the lateral geniculate nucleus, eliminates lowthreshold spiking, causing bursting cells to fire in tonic mode
(McCormick 1989, 1992). The role of corticogeniculate input in control of response mode has been more difficult to
assessin vivo, because electrical activation of this pathway
also usually activates geniculocortical axons antidromically,
obscuring the interpretation of any effects. However, be-

1388

S. M.

SHERMAN

AND

cause corticogeniculate but not retinogeniculate inputs use
a metabotropic glutamate receptor, it is possible to mimic
activation of the corticogeniculate
input fairly specifically
by applying agonists for this receptor to geniculate relay
cells. When this is done in vivo, geniculate cells switch firing
mode from burst to tonic (Godwin et al. 1996).
It thus appears that both of these major inputs to the lateral
geniculate nucleus, from cortex and from the parabrachial
region, strongly influence response mode. Each of these
pathways also connects to the thalamic reticular nucleus
(Fig. 4)) one with clear evidence of local sign corresponding
to position in visual space and the other with no evidence
for local sign and probable exerting global actions. Although
the precise role of the reticular nucleus in controlling the
switch between tonic and burst modes remains to be defined
in the alert animal, it should be clear from its connections
that the reticular nucleus is likely to be intimately involved
in the switch. Because activation of parabrachial or cortical
inputs switches firing mode from burst to tonic, it seems
likely that inactivation of these pathways does the opposite,
but this remains to be tested.
Suggested role of response mode for vision
From the above, we can speculate on the possible role of
burst and tonic response modes for vision. When the animal
is not attending to a particular visual stimulus, either because
it is searching for a stimulus, attending visually to another
stimulus, attending via another sensory modality, or not attending at all but in a drowsy state, the geniculate relay
cells for that particular stimulus will be in burst mode. This
suggests that the cortical or parabrachial inputs to these geniculate cells are relatively quiescent. Such firing in burst
mode enhances the ability of the geniculate relay cells to
detect the presence of a novel stimulus, one that is potentially
interesting or threatening. Such enhanced detection, however, is associated with nonlinear distortion and is thus unsuitable for accurate stimulus processing. Once novel stimuli
or major components of a visual scene are detected, if they
are sufficiently significant, then relay cells can be switched
via activation of the cortical or parabrachial inputs to tonic
firing. Because the stimuli now are detected, burst firing is
no longer so important. The tonic firing now enhances linear
processing through the lateral geniculate nucleus and permits
the visual system to analyze the scene more faithfully.
By definition, the corticogeniculate input conveys strictly
visual information, and it is mapped with great retinotopic
precision. Thus its control of response mode would be limited to attentional needs within the visual domain. For instance, if the animal were paying attention to one stimulus
(e.g., likely with the fovea or area centralis, but conceivably
with peripheral retina), geniculate cells mapped to the rest
of the visual field would be maintained in burst mode, primed
to detect any new stimulus of potential interest or danger.
On the other hand, the parabrachial input, which probably
lacks local sign (see above Brain stem agerents), is likely
to be multimodal in nature and may be initiated by a specific
sensory stimulus or by a general change in level of arousal
or mood.
Thalamic relay cells, including those of the lateral geniculate nucleus, burst rhythmically
during certain phases of

R. W. GUILLERY

sleep (McCarley
et al. 1983; Steriade and Contreras 1995;
Steriade and Llinas 1988; Steriade et al. 1990, 1993), and
this seems to imply a functional disconnection of these cells
from their main afferents, interrupting the thalamic relay.
Our suggested role for the burst mode of firing is not incompatible with this other role. Instead, we are suggesting that,
depending on the animal’s behavioral state (e.g., alert vs.
sleeping), burst firing can subserve at least two quite different roles or perhaps two extremes of one role: either providing a computational mode in the awake animal that can
record significant but possibly minor changes in specific
afferent activity and use this to focus the tonic mode upon
the cause of these changes for more accurate analysis, or
else, in the sleeping animal produce the same switch from
burst to tonic mode, but only in response to major stimuli
that are seen as sufficiently threatening or significant to wake
the animal. That is, sleeping may involve more complete
functional shutting off of cortical and parabrachial inputs,
more analogous to the in vitro situation where these inputs
are physically removed. The low levels of activity present
in these pathways during the waking state may permit single
low-threshold
spikes but prevent rhythmic bursting. Bursting, when rhythmic, may provide a positive signal to cortex
that nothing is being relayed despite the possible presence
of sensory stimuli, and this is less ambiguous than no activity, which could either mean no relay or no stimulus. When
the bursting is arrhythmic, cortex can interpret this arrhythmicity as representing responses evoked by sensory stimuli.
FINAL

OVERVIEW

The thalamus, through the nuclei we have here called first
order nuclei, provides the main path to the cerebral cortex
for information about what the outside world is doing or
what the subcortical parts of the brain are doing. In addition,
other nuclei of the thalamus, here called the higher order
nuclei, receive primary afferents that come from layer 5
pyramidal cells of the cerebral cortex, and these provide
information about what the cerebral cortex is doing, particularly about the output pathways of the cortex. These two
types of thalamocortical pathway provide the major information channels through the thalamus.
Corticothalamic
afferents from layer 6 pyramidal cells,
the parabrachial afferents, and possibly some of the other
afferents going to the thalamus, can be regarded as modulatory pathways. They appear to control response mode of the
thalamocortical relay: promoting either burst mode, for close
monitoring of changes in the relayed inputs, or tonic mode,
to permit more accurate reconstruction
of events being relayed. Burst mode would be preferred for enhanced vigilance, and tonic mode could be invoked by activity among
afferents from layer 6 of cortex or from the parabrachial
region when a relayed signal is detected that is of potential
interest, danger, or pleasure to the animal. Not only would
this apply to signals relayed from the periphery through first
order thalamic relay nuclei, but in a comparable manner,
one can anticipate that higher order thalamic nuclei can serve
to monitor patterns of output from cortical areas, so that
when particularly important output messages are sent out
from layer 5 pyramidal cells, the higher order nuclei can be
set from burst to tonic mode, thereby permitting information

THALAMIC

about the novel cortical output to pass to another (higher)
cortical area.
Whereas the primary afferent axons from subcortical and
from layer 5 cortical origins send no terminals to the thalamic reticular nucleus, the cortical axons that come from layer
6 and the axons from the parabrachial nucleus. which can
be regarded as modulatory Bxons, send branches to this nucleus. The reticular nucleus in turn also can produce a modification of the discharge properties of thalamic relay cells,
so that it becomes important to define how the several inputs
to any one sector of the reticular nucleus may relate to each
other. Further, it is necessary to distinguish pathways that
have local sign and that therefore can be expected to act
upon a limited part of any active sensory or corticifugal
pathway from pathways that lack local sign or have poorly
defined local sign, which are more likely to have a global
modulatory influence upon thalamic transmission. Furthermore, and perhaps of greatest interest, are the possibilities
that arise within the thalamic reticular nucleus for higher
order circuits to act upon first order circuits, and vice versa,
providing opportunities for one cortical area to modify the
discharge properties of thalamic relays to other cortical
areas.
We have outlined a significant number of axon connections and synaptic relationships that reveal an extraordinary
potential for complexity in thalamic transmission. We have
shown that it is unrealistic to regard the thalamus as a simple
relay conveying messages from the periphery to the cortex
without significant modification. Some of the complexity of
the thalamus is beginning to be resolved, but perhaps one
of the most challenging features of this cell group is to
resolve the detailed connections and functional significance
of many synaptic relationships that we have presented in
. .
.
this review.
Address for reprint requests: S. M. Sherman,
State University
of New York, Story Brook, NY
Received

23 October

1995; accepted

in final

form

Dept. of Neurobiology,
11794-5230.
3 May

1996.

REFERENCES
N. C. AND GUILLERY,
R. W. Developing
rat corticothalamic
fibres
defasciculate
when they reach the perireticular
nucleus. Sot. Neurosci.
Abstr. 20: 1685, 1994.
ADAMS,
P. R. Voltage-dependent
conductances
of vertebrate
neurones.
Trends Neurosci.
5: I16- 119, 1982.
AHLSI?N,
G., LINDSTR~M,
S., AND Lo., F.-S. Inhibition
from the brainstem
of inhibitory
interneurones
of the cat’s dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus.
J. Physiol. Lond. 347: 593-609,
1984.
AHLS~N,
G., LINDSTR~M,
S., AND Lo, F.-S. Interaction
between inhibitory
pathways
to principal
cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat.
Exp. Brain Res. 58: 134-143,
1985.
AIRAKSINEN,
M. S. AND PANULA,
P. The histaminergic
system in the guinea
pig central nervous system: an immunocytochemical
mapping study using
an antiserum against histamine.
J. Comp. Neurol. 273: 163 - 186, 1988.
AITKIN,
L. M. Medial geniculate body of the cat: responses to tonal stimuli
of neurons in medial division.
J. Neurophysiol.
36: 275-283,
1973.
AITKIN,
L. M. AND WEBSTER,
W. R. Medial geniculate
body of the cat:
organization
and responses to tonal stimuli of neurons in ventral division.
J. Neurophysiol.
35: 365-380,
1972.
ALTMAN,
J. AND CARPENTER
M. B. Fiber projections
of the superior colliculus of the cat. J. Comp. Neurol.
116: 157-177,
1961.
ASANUMA,
C. Specific distribution
of some “non-specific”
afferents upon
individual
thalamic reticular nucleus neurons. In: Thalamic Networks
For
ADAMS,

RELAY

1389

Relay And Modulation,
edited by D. Minciacchi,
M. Molinari,
G. Macchi,
and E. G. Jones. Oxford:
Pergamon
Press, 1993, p. 323-336.
ASANUMA,
C. AND PORTER, L. L. Light and electron
microscopic
evidence
for a GABAergic
projection
from the caudal basal forebrain
to the thalamic reticular nucleus in rats. J. Comp. Neural. 302: 159- 172, 1990.
AUMANN,
T. D., RAWSON,
J. A., FIN&UTEIN,
D. I., AND HORNE,
M. K.
Projections
from the lateral and interposed cerebellar nuclei to the thalamus in the rat: a light and electron microscopic
study using single and
double anterograde
labelling.
J. Comp. Neural. 349: 165- 181, 1994.
BAKER,
F. H. AND MALPELI,
J. G. Effects of cryogenic
blockade of visual
cortex on the responses of lateral geniculate neurons in the monkey. Exp.
Brain Res. 29: 433-444,
1977.
BAL, T., VON KROSIGK,
M., AND MCCORMICK,
D. A. Synaptic and membrane mechanisms
underlying
synchronized
oscillations
in the ferret latera1 geniculate nucleus in vitro. J. Physiol. Lond. 483: 641-663,
1995.
BARBARESI,
P., SPREAFICO,
R., FRASSONI, C., AND RUSTIONI, A. GABAergic
neurons are present in the dorsal column nuclei but not in the ventroposterior complex of rats. Brain Res. 382: 305-326,
1986.
BENDER,
D. B. Visual activation
of neurons in the primate pulvinar depnds
on cortex but not colliculus.
Brain Res. 279: 258-261,
1983.
BERESFORD,
W. A. A Nauta and Gallocyanin
study of the cortico-lateral
geniculate projection
in the cat and monkey.
J. Hirnforsch.
5: 210-228,
1962.
BERMAN,
A. L. AND JONES, E. G. The Thalamus And Basal Telencephalon
Of The Cat: A Cytoarchitectonic
Atlas With Stereotaxic
Coordinates.
Madison,
WI: University
of Wisconsin
Press, 1977.
BERMAN,
N. Connections
of the pretectum
in the cat. J. Coma.1 Neural.
&
174: 227-254,
1977.
BERSON,
D. M. AND GRAYBIEL,
A. M. Organization
of the striate-recipient
zone of the cat’s lateralis posterior-pulvinar
complex
and its relations
with the geniculostriate
system. Neuroscience
9: 337-372,
1983.
BICKFORD,
M. E., GUNLUK,
A. E., GUIDO, W., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Evidence that cholinergic
axons from the parabrachial
region of the brainstem
are the exclusive
source of nitric oxide in the lateral geniculate
nucleus
of the cat. J. Comp. Neurol. 334: 410-430,
1993.
BICKFORD,
M. E., GCJNLUK,
A. E., VAN HORN, S. C., AND SHERMAN,
S. M.
GABAergic
projection
from the basal forebrain
to the visual sector of
the thalamic
reticular
nucleus in the cat. J. Comp. Neural.
348: 48 l510, 1994a.
BICKFORD,
M. E., GUNLUK,
A. E., VAN HORN, S. C., VAUGHAN,
J. W.,
GOODWIN,
D. W., AND SHERMAN , S. M. Thalamic reticular nucleus synaptic targets in the cat LGN. Sot. Neurosci. Abstr. 20: 8, 1994b.
BISHOP, P. O., KOZAK,
W., LEVICK, W. R., AND VAKKUR,
G. J. The determination of the projection
of the visual field on to the lateral geniculate
nucleus in the cat. J. Physiol. Lond. 163: 503-539,
1962.
BLOOMFIELD,
S. A., HAMOS,
J. E., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Passive cable
properties
and morphological
correlates of neurones in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. J. Physiol. Lond. 383: 653-692,
1987.
BLOOMFIELD,
S. A. AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Dendritic
current flow in relay
cells and interneurons
of the cat’s lateral geniculate nucleus. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 86: 3911-3914,
1989.
BOIVIE, J. Anatomical
observations
on the dorsal column nuclei, their thalamic projection
and the cytoarchtecture
of some somatosensory
thalamic
nucleis in the monkey.
J. Comp. Neural.
178: 17-28,
1978.
BOIVIE, J. An anatomical
reinvestigation
of the termination
of the spinothalamic tract in the monkey.
J. Comp. Neural.
186: 343-370,
1979.
BOURASSA,
J. AND DESCH~NES,
M. Corticothalamic
projections
from the
primary
visual cortex in rats: a single fiber study using biocytin
as an
anterograde
tracer. Neuroscience
66: 253 -263, 1995.
BOURASSA,
J., PINAULT,
D., AND DESCH~NES,
M. Corticothalamic
projections from the cortical barrel field to the somatosensory
thalamus
in
rats: a single-fibre
study using biocytin
as an anterograde
tracer. Eur. J.
Neurosci.
7: 19-30,
1995.
BOWLING,
D. B. AND MICHAEL,
C. R. Terminal patterns of single, physiologically characterized
opti tract fibers in the cat’s lateral geniculate nucleus.
J. Neurosci.
4: 198-216,
1984.
BREDT, D. S. AND SNYDER,
S. H. Nitric oxide, a novel neuronal messenger.
Neuron 8: 3-11, 1992.
BRODAL,
A. Neurological
Anatomy
In Relation To Clinical Medicine.
Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 198 1.
BROMBERG,
M. B., PENNEY, J. B., JR ., STEPHENSON,
B. S., AND YOUNG,
A. B. Evidence for glutamate
as the neurotransmitter
of corticothalamic
and corticorubral
pathways.
Brain Res. 2 15: 369-374,
1981.

1390

S. M.

SHERMAN

AND

S. AND RAM~N,
Y. Histologie
Du Systeme Nerveux
De L’Homme
Et Des Vertebres.
Maloine,
Paris, 1911.
CALFORD,
M. B. AND WEBSTER,
W. R. Auditory
representation
within principal division
of cat medial geniculate
body: an electrophysiological
study. J. Neurophysiol.
45: 1013-1028,
1981.
CATANIA,
K. C. AND KAAS, J. H. Organization
of the somatosensory
cortex
of the star-nosed mole. J. Comp. New-o& 35 1: 549-567,
1995.
CICIRATA,
F., ANGAUT,
P., SERAPIDE,
M. F., AND PANTO, M. R. Functional
organization
of the direct and indirect projection via the reticularis thalami
nuclear complex from the motor cortex to the thalamic nucleus ventralis
lateralis. Exp. Brain Res. 79: 325-337,
1990.
CHEN, S. AND BENTIVOGLIO,
M. Nerve growth factor receptor-containing
cholinergic
neurons of the basal forebrain project to the thalamic reticular
nucleus in the rat. Brain Res. 606: 207 -2 12, 1993.
CLELAND,
B. G., DUBIN, M. W., AND LEVICK, W. R. Sustained and transient
neurones in the cat’s retina and lateral geniculate
nucleus. J. Physiol.
Lond. 217: 473-496,
1971.
CLELAND,
B. G., LEVICK, W. R., MORSTYN, R., AND WAGNER,
H. G. Lateral
geniculate relay of slowly conducting
retinal afferents to cat visual cortex.
J. Physiol. Lond. 255: 299-320,
1976.
COLONNIER,
M. AND GUILLERY,
R. W. Synaptic organization
i the lateral
geniculate nucleus of the monkey.
2. Zellforsch.
62: 333-355,
1964.
CONLEY,
M. AND DIAMOND,
I. T. Organization
of the visual sector of the
thalamic
reticular
nucleus in Galago.
Evidence
that the dorsal lateral
geniculate
and pulvinar
nuclei occupy separate parallel tiers. Eur. J.
Neurosci.
2: 21 l-226,
1990.
CONLEY,
M., KUPERSMITH,
A. C., AND DIAMOND,
I. T. The organization
of
projections
from subdivisions
of the auditory cortex and thalamus to the
auditory sector of the thalamic reticular nucleus in Galago. Eur. J. Neurosci. 3: 1089-1103,
1991.
CONLEY,
M. AND RASKOWSKY,
D. Sublaminar
organization
within layer VI
of the striate cortex in Galago. J. Comp. Neural. 302: 425-436,
1990.
CONNOLLY,
M. AND VAN ESSEN, D. The representation
of the visual field
in the parvicellular
and magnocellular
layers of the lateral geniculate
nucleus in the macaque monkey.
J. Comp. Neural. 226: 544-564,
1980.
CONTRERAS,
D. AND STERIADE,
M. Cellular basis of EEG slow rhythms:
a
study of dynamic corticothalamic
relationships.
J. Neurosci.
15: 604622, 1995.
CONWAY,
J. L. AND SCHILLER,
P. H. Laminar
organization
of tree shrew
dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Neurophysiol.
50: 1330- 1342, 1983.
CORNWALL,
J., COOPER J. D., AND PILLIPSON,
0. T. Projections to the rostra1
reticular thalamic nucleus in the rat. Exp. Brain Res. 80: 157- 17 1, 1990.
CORNWALL,
J. AND PHILLIPSON,
0. T. Afferent
projections
to the parafascicular thalamic nucleus of the rat, as shown by the retrograde
transport
of wheat germ agglutinin.
Brain Res. Bull. 20: 139- 150, 1988.
CRABTREE,
J. W. The somatotopic
organization
within the rabbit’s thalamic
reticular nucleus. Eur. J. Neurosci.
4: 1343- 135 1, 1992a.
CRABTREE,
J. W. The somatotopic
organization
within the cat’s thalamic
reticular nucleus. Eur. J. Neurosci.
4: 1352- 1361, 1992b.
CRABTREE,
J. W. Organization
of the somatosensory
sector of the cat’s
thalamic reticular nucleus. J. Comp. Neural. 366: 207-222,
1996.
CRABTREE,
J. W. AND KILLACKEY,
H. P. The somatotopic
organization
and
axis of projection within the visual sector of the rabbit’s thalamic reticular
nucleus. Eur. J. Neurosci.
1: 94- 109, 1989.
CRICK,
F. Function
of the thalamic reticular complex:
the searchlight
hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81: 4586-4590,
1984.
CRUNELLI,
V., HABY, M., JASSIK-GERSCHENFELD,
D., LERESCHE,
N., AND
PIRCHIO,
M. Cl -- and K+ -dependent
inhibitory
postsynaptic
potentials
evoked by interneurones
of the rat lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Physiol.
Lond. 399: 153-176,
1988.
CRUNELLI,
V. AND LERESCHE,
N. A role for GABAB receptors in excitation
and inhibition
of thalamocortical
cells. Trends Neurosci.
14: 16-2 1,
1991.
CRUNELLI,
V., LIGHTOWLER,
S., AND POLLARD,
C. E. A T-type Ca2’ current
underlies low-threshold
Ca2+ potentials in cells of the cat and rat lateral
geniculate nucleus. J. Physiol. Lond. 413: 543-561,
1989.
CUCCHIARO,
J. B., BICKFORD,
M. E., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. A GABAergic
projection
from the pretectum
to the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus in
the cat. Neuroscience
41: 213-226,
1991a.
CUCCHIARO,
J. B., UHLRICH,
D. J., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. A projection
from
the thalamic reticular nucleus to the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus in
the cat: a comparison
with the perigeniculate
projection.
Sot. Neurosci.
Abstr. 16: 159, 1990.
CUCCHIARO,
J. B., UHLRICH,
D. J., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Electron-microCAJAL,

R. W. GUILLERY
scopic analysis of synaptic input from the perigeniculate
nucleus to the
A-laminae
of the lateral geniculate
nucelus in cats. J. Comp. Neural.
310: 316-336,
1991b.
CUCCHIARO,
J. B., UHLRICH,
D. J., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Ultrastructure
of
synapses from the pretectum
in the A-laminae
of the cat’s lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Comp. Neural. 334: 618-630,
1993.
CUDEIRO,
J., GRIEVE, K. L., RIVADULLA,
C., RODRIGUEZ,
R., MARTINEZCONDE, S., AND ACURA,
C. The role of nitric oxide in the transformation
of visual information
within the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus of the
cat. Neuropharmacology
33: 14 13 - 14 18, 1994a.
CUDEIRO,
J., RIVADULLA,
C., RODRIGUEZ,
R., MARTINEZ-C•
NDE, S., ACURA,
C., AND ALONSO,
J. M. Modulatory
influence of putative inhibitors
of
nitric oxide synthesis on visual processing
in the cat lateral geniculate
nucleus. J. Neurophysiol.
71: 146- 149, 1994b.
CUDEIRO,
J., C. RIVADULLA,
R. RODRIGUEZ,
S. MARTINEZ-C•
NDE, L. MARTINEZ, K. L. GRIEVE,
AND C. ACURA Further
observations
on the role of
nitric oxide in the feline lateral geniculate nucleus. Eur. J. Neurosci.
8:
144-152,
1996.
DE LIMA, A. D., MONTERO,
V. M., AND SINGER, W. The cholinergic
innervation of the visual thalamus:
an EM immunocytochemical
study. Exp.
Brain Res. 59: 206-212,
1985.
DE LIMA,
A. D. AND SINGER, W. The serotoninergic
fibers in the dorsal
lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat: distribution
and synaptic connections
demonstrated
with immunocytochemistry.
J. Comp. Neural. 258: 339351, 1987a.
DE LIMA,
A. D. AND SINGER, W. The brainstem
projection
to the lateral
geniculate nucleus in the cat: identification
of cholinergic
and monoaminergic elements. J. Comp. Neural. 259: 92- 121, 1987b.
DERRINGTON,
A. M. AND LENNIE, P. Spatial and temporal contrast sensitivities of neurones in lateral geniculate
nucleus of macaque.
J. Physiol.
Lond. 357: 219-240,
1984.
DESCH~NES,
M., BOURASSA,
J., AND PINAULT,
D. Corticothalamic
projections from layer V cells in rat are collaterals
of long-range
corticofugal
axons. Brain Res. 664: 215-219,
1994.
DESCH~NES,
M. AND Hu, B. Electrophysiology
and pharmacology
of the
corticothalamic
input to lateral thalamic nuclei in cat. Eur. J. Neurosci.
2: 140-152,
1990.
DESCH~NES,
M., PARADIS, M., ROY, J. P., AND STERIADE, M. Electrophysiology of neurons of lateral thalamic
nuclei in cat: resting properties
and
burst discharges.
J. Neurophysiol.
5 1: 1196- 12 19, 1984.
DEYOE,
E. A., FELLEMAN,
D. J., VAN ESSEN, D. C., AND MCCLENDON,
E.
Multiple
processing
streams in occipitotemporal
visual cortex. Nature
Lond. 371: 151-154,
1994.
DIAMOND,
M. E., ARMSTRONG-JAMES,
M., BUDWAY,
M. J., AND EBNER,
F. F. Somatic sensory responses in the rostra1 sector of the posterior
group (Porn) and in the ventral posterior medial nucleus (VPM)
of the
rat thalamus:
dependence
on the barrel field cortex. J. Comp. Neural.
319: 66-84,
1992.
DINGLEDINE,
R. AND KELLEY, J. S. Brain stem stimulation
and the acetylcholine-evoked
inhibition
of neurons in feline nucleus reticularis
thalami. J.
Physiol. Lond. 271: 135- 154, 1977.
DREHER,
B. AND SEFTON, A. J. Properties
of neurons in cat’s dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus: a comparison
between medial interlaminar
and laminated parts of the nucleus. J. Comp. Neural.
183: 47-64,
1979.
EDWARDS,
S. B. AND DE OLMOS,
J. S. Autoradiographic
studies of the
projections
of the midbrain reticular formation:
ascending projections
of
nucleus cuneiformis.
J. Comp. Neural. 165: 417-432,
1976.
ELLIOT-SMITH,
G. Some problems
relating to the evolution
of the brain.
Lancet I: I-6, 147-153,
221-227,
1910.
FAMIGLIETTI,
E. V., JR. AND PETERS, A. The synaptic glomerulus
and the
intrinsic
neuron in the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat. J.
Comp. Neural.
144: 285-334,
1972.
FEIG, S. AND HARTING, J. K. Ultrastructural
studies of the primate lateral
geniculate nucleus: morphology
and spatial relationships
of axon terminals arising from the retina, visual cortex (Area 17)) superior colliculus,
parabigeminal
nucleus,
and pretectum
of Galago
crassicaudatus.
J.
Comp. Neural. 343: 17-34,
1994.
FELLEMAN,
D. J. AND VAN ESSEN, D. C. Distributed
hierarchical
processing
in the primate cerebral cortex. Cereb. Cortex 1: l-47,
199 1.
FITZPATRICK,
D., DIAMOND,
I. T., AND RACZKOWSKI,
D. Cholinergic
and
monoaminergic
innervation
of the cat’s thalamus:
comparison
of the
lateral geniculate
nucleus with other principal
sensory nuclei. J. Comp.
Neurol. 288: 647-675,
1989.
FITZPATRICK,
D., USREY, W. M., SCHOFIELD,
B. R., AND EINSTEIN,
G. The

THALAMIC
sublaminar
organization
of corticogeniculate
neurons in layer 6 of macaque striate cortex. Visual Neurosci.
11: 307-3 15, 1994.
FONNUM,
F., STORM-MATHISEN,
J., AND DIVAC,
I. Biochemical
evidence
for glutamate
as neurotransmitter
in corticostriatal
and corticothalamic
fibres in rat brain. Neuroscience
6: 863-873,
1981.
FOSSE, V. M. AND FONNUM,
F. Biochemical
evidence for glutamate
and/
or aspartate as neurotransmitters
in fibers from the visual cortex to the
lateral posterior thalamic nucleus ( pulvinar)
in rats. Brain Res. 400: 219224, 1987.
FRIEDLANDER,
M. J., LIN, C.-S., STANFORD,
L. R., AND SHERMAN,
S. M.
Morphology
of functionally
identified
neurons in lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat. J. Neurophysiol.
46: 80- 129, 198 1.
FUNKE,
K. AND EYSEL,
U. T. Pharmacological
inactivation
of pretectal
nuclei reveals different modulatory
effects on retino-geniculate
transmission by X and Y cells in the cat. Visual Neurosci.
12: 21-33,
1995.
FUNKE,
K., PAPE, H.-C., AND EYSEL, U. T. Noradrenergic
modulation
of
retinogeniculate
transmission
in the cat. J. Physiol. Lond. 463: 169- 19 1,
1993.
GALAMBOS,
R. Microelectrode
studies on medial geniculate body of cat. II.
responses to pure tones. J. Neurophysiol.
15: 381-400,
1952.
GEISERT, E. E., LANGSETMO,
A., AND SPEAR, P. D. Influence of the corticogeniculate pathway
on response properties
of cat lateral geniculate neurons. Brain Res. 208: 409-415,
1981.
GILBERT,
C. D. Laminar differences
in receptive field properties
of cells in
cat primary
visual cortex. J. Physiol. Lond. 268: 39 l-421,
1977.
GILBERT,
C. D. AND KELLY, J. P. The projections
of cells in different layers
of the cat’s visual cortex. J. Physiol. Lond. 163: 8 1 - 106, 1975.
GIUFFRIDA,
R. AND RUSTIONI,
A. Glutamate
and aspartate immunoreactivity
in corticothalamic
neurons of rats. In: Cellular
Thalamic
Mechanisms,
edited by M. Bentivoglio
and R. Spreafico. Amsterdam:
Elsevier,
1988,
p. 31 l-320.
GLEES, P. AND LE GROS CLARK,
W. E. The termination
of optic fibres in
the lateral geniculate nucleus of the monkey. J. Anat. 75: 295 -308, 1941.
GODWIN,
D. W., VAUGHAN,
J. W., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Metabotropic
glutamate
receptors
switch visual response mode of lateral geniculate
nucleus cells from burst to tonic. J. Neurophysiol.
76: in press.
GRAHAM,
J. An autoradiographic
study of the efferent connections
of the
superior colliculus
in the cat. J. Comp. Neurol.
173: 629-654,
1977.
GRAYBIEL,
A. M. Some extrageniculate
visual pathways in the cat. Invest.
Ophthalmol.
I I: 322-332,
1972.
GRAYBIEL,
A. M. AND BERSON,
D. M. Autoradiographic
evidence
for a
projection
from the prestectal nucleus of the optic tract to the dorsal
lateral geniculate complex in the cat. Brain Res. 195: 1 - 12, 1980.
GREEN, D. M. AND SWETS, J. A. Signal Detection
Theory And Psychophysics. Wiley: New York, 1966.
GRIEVE,
K. L. AND SILLITO, A. M. Differential
properties
of cells in the
feline primary
visual cortex providing
the corticofugal
feedback
to the
lateral geniculate
nucleus and visual claustrum.
J. Neurosci.
15: 48684874, 1995.
GROFOVA,
I. AND RINVIK, E. Cortical and pallidal projections
to the nucleus
ventralis lateralis thalami. Electron microscopical
studies in the cat. Anat.
Embryol.
146: 113-132,
1974.
GUIDO, W., Lu, S.-M., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Relative contributions
of burst
and tonic responses to the receptive field properties
of lateral geniculate
neurons in the cat. J. Neurophysiol.
68: 2199-2211,
1992.
GUIDO,
W., Lu, S.-M., VAUGHAN,
J. W., GODWIN,
D. W., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Receiver operating characteristic
(ROC)
analysis of neurons in the
cat’s lateral geniculate
nucleus during tonic and burst response mode.
Visual Neurosci.
12: 723-741,
1995.
GUIDO, W. AND WEYAND,
T. Burst responses in thalamic relay cells of the
awake behaving
cat. J. Neurophysiol.
74: 1782-1786,
1995.
GUILLERY,
R. W. A study of Golgi preparations
from the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus of the adult cat. J. Comp. Neural.
128: 21-50,
1966.
GUILLERY,
R. W. Patterns of fiber degeneration
in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat following
lesions in the visual cortex. J. Comp.
Neurol.
130: 197-222,
1967.
GUILLERY,
R. W. The organization
of synaptic interconnections
in the laminae of the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat. 2. Zellforsch.
96:
l-38,
1969a.
GUILLERY,
R. W. A quantitative
study of synaptic interconnections
in the
dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat. 2. Zellforsch.
96: 39-48,
1969b.
GUILLERY,
R. W. Patterns of synaptic interconnections
in the dorsal lateral

RELAY

1391

geniculate
nucleus of cat and monkey:
a brief review.
Vision Res. 3
Supplement:
21 l-227,
1971a.
GUILLERY,
R. W. Patterns of fiber degeneration
in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat following
lesions in the visual cortex. J. Comp.
Neural. 130: 197-222,
197lb.
GUILLERY,
R. W. Anatomical
evidence concerning
the role of the thalamus
in corticocortical
communication:
a brief review. J. Anat. 187: 583-592,
1995.
GUILLERY,
R. W., GEISERT, E. E., POLLEY,
E. H., AND MASON,
C. A.
Analysis of the retinal afferents to the cat’s medial interlaminar
nucleus
and to its rostra1 thalamic extension,
the ‘ ‘geniculate
wing”.
J. Comp.
Neurol.
194: 117-142,
1980.
GUILLERY,
R. W. AND SCOTT, G. L. Observations
on synaptic patterns in
the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat: the C laminae and the
perikaryal
synapses. Exp. Brain Res. 12: 184-203,
1971.
HAMORI,
J., PASIK, T., PASIK, P., AND SZENTAGOTHAI,
J. Triadic synaptic
arrangements
and their possible significance
in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the monkey.
Brain Res. 80: 379-393,
1974.
HAMORI,
J., TAKACS, J., VERLEY, R., PETRUSZ, P., AND FARKAS-BARGETON,
E. Plasticity
of GABAand glutamate-containing
terminals in the mouse
thalamic ventrobasal
complex deprived of vibrissal afferents: an immunogold-electron
microscopic
study. J. Comp. Neural. 302: 739-748,
1990.
HAMOS,
J. E., VAN HORN, S. C., RACZKOWSKI,
D., UHLRICH,
D. J., AND
SHERMAN,
S. M. Synaptic connectivity
of a local circuit neurone in lateral
geniculate
nucleus of the cat. Nature Lond. 3 17: 618 -621, 1985.
HAMOS,
J. E., VAN HORN, S. C., RACZKOWSKI,
D., AND SHERMAN,
S. M.
Synaptic circuits involving
an individual
retinogeniculate
axon in the cat.
J. Comp. Neurol. 259: 165-192,
1987.
HARDING,
B. N. An ultrastructural
study of the termination
of afferent fibres
within the ventrolateral
and centre median nuclei of the monkey thalamus.
Brain Res. 54: 341-346,
1973.
HARRIS,
R. M. AND HENDRICKSON,
A. E. Local circuit neurons in the rat
ventrobasal
thalamus-a
GABA immunocytochemical
study. Neuroscience 21: 229-236,
1987.
HARTING,
J. K., HASHIKAWA,
T., AND VAN LIESHOUT,
D. Laminar distribution of tectal, parabigeminal
and pretectal inputs to the primate dorsal
lateral geniculate nucleus: connectional
studies in Galago crassicaudatus.
Brain Res. 366: 358-363,
1986.
HARTING,
J. K., HUERTA,
M. F., FRANKFURTER,
A. J., STROMINGER,
N. L.,
AND ROYCE, G. J. Ascending
pathways from the monkey superior colliculus: an autoradiographic
analysis. J. Comp. Neural. 192: 853-882,
1980.
HARTING,
J. K., HUERTA,
F., HASHIKAWA,
T., AND VAN LIESHOUT,
D. P.
Projection
of the mammalian
superior colliculus
upon the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus: organization
of tectogeniculate
pathways in nineteen
species. J. Comp. Neurol. 304: 275-306,
1991a.
HARTING,
J. K., VAN LIESHOUT,
D. P., AND FEIG, S. Connectional
studies
of the primate lateral geniculate
nucleus: distribution
of axons arising
from the thalamic reticular nucleus of Galago crassicaudatus.
J. Comp.
Neurol. 310: 41 l-427,
1991b.
HARTING,
J. K., VAN LIESHOUT,
D. P., HASHIKAWA,
T., AND WEBER,
J.
T. The parabigeminogeniculate
projection:
connectional
studies in eight
mammals.
J. Comp Neurol. 305: 559-581,
1991~.
HARTVEIT,
E. AND HEGGELUND,
P. Neurotransmitter
receptors
mediating
excitatory
input to cells in the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. II. Nonlagged
cells. J. Neurophysiol.
63: 1361- 1372, 1990.
HEGGELUND,
P. AND HARTVEIT,
E. Neurotransmitter
receptors
mediating
excitatory
input to cells in the cat lateral geniculate
nucleus. I. Lagged
cells. J. Neurophysiol.
63: 1347- 1360, 1990.
HERNAIQDEZ-CRUZ,
A. AND PAPE, H.-C. Identification
of two calcium currents in acutely dissociated neurons from the rat lateral geniculate nucleus.
J. Neurophysiol.
61: 1270- 1283, 1989.
HOFFMANN,
K.-P., STONE, J., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Relay of receptive-field
properties
in dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. J. Neurophysiol.
35: 518-531,
1972.
HOLL~NDER,
H. Projections
from the striate cortex to the diencephalon
of
the squirrel monkey
(Saimiri
sciureus).
A light microscopic
radioautographic study following
intracortical
injections
of H” leucine. J. Comp.
Neurol.
155: 425-440,
1974.
HOOGLAND,
P. V., WATERLOOD,
F. G., WELKER,
E., AND VAN DER Loos,
H. Ultrastructure
of giant and small thalamic terminals of cortical origin:
a study of the projections
from the barrel cortex in mice using phaseolus
vulgaris leucoagglutinin
(PHA-L).
Exp. Brain Res. 87: 159- 172, 1991.
HOOGLAND,
P. V., WELKER,
E., AND VAN DER Loos, H. Organization
of the

1392

S. M.

SHERMAN

AND

projections
from barrel cortex to thalamus in mice studied with phaseolus
vulgaris leucoagglutinin
and HRP. Exp. Brain Res. 68: 73 -87, 1987.
Hu, B., STERIADE,
M., AND DESCH~NES,
M. The effects of brainstem peribrachial stimulation
on perigeniculate
neurons: the blockage of spindle
waves. Neuroscience
3 1: I- 12, 1989a.
Hu, B., STERIADE,
M., AND DESCH~NES,
M. The cellular
mechanism
of
thalamic
ponto-geniculo-occipital
waves.
Neuroscience
3 1: 25 -35,
1989b.
HUBEL,
D. H. AND WIESEL,
T. N. Integrative
action in the cat’s lateral
geniculate body. J. Physiol. Lond. 155: 385-398,
1961.
HUGHES,
H. C. AND MULLIKIN,
W. H. Brain stem afferents to the lateral
geniculate nucleus of the cat. Exp. Brain Res. 54: 253-258,
1984.
HUGUENARD,
J. R. AND MCCORMICK,
D. A. Simulation
of the currents
involved in rhythmic oscillations in thalamic relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 68: 1373- 1383, 1992.
HUGUENARD,
J. R. AND PRINCE, D. A. Intrathalamic
rhythmicity
studied in
vitro: nominal T-current
modulation
causes robust antioscillatory
effects.
J. Neurosci.
14: 5485-5502,
1994.
IRVIN, G. E., NORTON,
T. T., SESMA, M. A., AND CASAGRANDE,
V. A. Wlike response properties of interlaminar
zone cells in the lateral geniculate
nucleus of a primate (Galago
crassicaudatus)
. Brain Res. 362: 254270, 1986.
IRVIN,
G. E., CASAGRANDE,
V. A., AND NORTON, T. T. Center/surround
relationships
of magnocellular,
parvocellular,
and koniocellular
relay
cells in primate lateral geniculate
nucleus. Visual Neurosci.
10: 363373, 1993.
ITOH, K., CONLEY,
M., AND DIAMOND,
I. T. Retinal ganglion cell projections
to individual
layers of the lateral geniculate body in Galago crassicaudatus. J. Comp. Neural. 205: 282-290,
1982.
IWAMURA,
Y. AND INUBUSHI,
S. Functional
organization
of receptive fields
in thalamic ventrobasal
neurons examined by neuronal response to iterative electrical stimulation
of skin. J. Neurophysiol.
37: 920-926,
1974.
JACK, J. J. B., NOBLE,
D., AND TSIEN, R. W. Electric
Current
Flow In
Excitable
Cells. Oxford:
Oxford
University
Press, 1975.
JAHNSEN,
H. AND LLINAS,
R. Electrophysiological
properties
of guinea-pig
thalamic
neurones: an in vitro study. J. Physiol. Lond. 349: 205-226,
1984a.
JAHNSEN,
H. AND LLIN&,
R. Ionic basis for the electroresponsiveness
and
oscillatory
properties of guinea-pig
thalamic neurones in vitro. J. Physiol.
Lond. 349: 227- 247, 1984b.
JOHNSON,
J. W. AND ASCHER,
P. Glycine potentiates
the NMDA
response
in cultured mouse brain neurons. Nature Lond. 325: 529-53 1, 1987.
JONES, E. G. Some aspects of the organization
of the thalamic
reticular
complex.
J. Comp. NeuroZ. 162: 285-308,
1975.
JONES, E. G. The Thalamus.
New York: Plenum Press, 1985.
JONES, E. G. AND POWELL,
T. P. S. The projections
of the somatic sensory
cortex upon the thalamus in the cat. Brain Res. 10: 369-39 1, 1968.
JONES, E. G. AND POWELL,
T. P. S. Electron microscopy
of synaptic glomeruli in the thalamic relay nuclei of the cat. Proc. Roy. Sot. Lond. B BioZ.
Sci. 172: 153-171,
1969a.
JONES, E. G. AND POWELL,
T. P. S. An electron microscopic
study of the
mode of termination
of cortico-thalamic
fibres within the sensory relay
nuclei of the thalamus. Proc. Roy. Sot. Lond. B BioZ. Sci. 172: 173- 185,
1969b.
JONES, E. G. AND ROCKEL,
A. J. The synaptic organization
in the medial
geniculate body of afferent fibres ascending from the inferior colliculus.
2. ZeZZjkrsch.
1 13: 44-66,
197 1.
KAAS,
J. H. The organization
of visual cortex in primates.
In: Sensory
Systems of Primates, edited by C. R. Noback. New York: Plenum, 1978,
p. 151-179.
KAAS, J. H. The organization
of neocortex
in mammals:
implications
for
theories of brain function. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 38: 129- 15 1, 1987.
KALIL,
R. E. AND CHASE, R. Corticofugal
influence on activity of lateral
geniculate neurons in the cat. J. Neurophysiol.
33: 459-474,
1970.
KAPLAN,
E. AND SHAPLEY,
R. M. X and Y cells in the lateral geniculate
nucleus of macaque monkeys.
J. Physiol. Lond. 330: 125- 143, 1982.
KATZ, L. C. Local circuitry
of identified
projection
neurons in cat visual
cortex brain slices. J. Neurosci.
7: 1223- 1249, 1987.
KAWAJIRI,
S. AND DINGLEDINE,
R. Multiple
structural determinants
of voltage-dependent
magnesium
block in recombinant
NMDA
receptors. Neuropharmacology
32: 1203 - 12 11, 1993.
KEMP, J. A. AND SILLITO,
A. M. The nature of the excitatory
transmitter
mediating X and Y cell inputs to the cat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus.
J. Physiol. Lond. 323: 377-39 1, 1982.

R. W. GUILLERY
N. W. AND DINGLEDINE,
R. Requirement
for glycine in activation of NMDA-receptors
expressed in Xenopus oocytes. Science Wash.
DC 241: 835-837,
1988.
KNIERIM,
J. J. AND VAN ESSEN, D. C. Visual cortex: cartography,
connectivity, and concurrent
processing. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
2: 150- 155, 1992.
KOCH, C. The action of the corticofugal
pathway on sensory thalamic nuclei:
a hypothesis.
Neuroscience
23: 399-406,
1987.
KOELLIKER,
A. Handbuch
Der Gewebelehre
Des Menschen.
Leipzig:
Wilhelm Engelmann,
1896.
KRATZ,
K. E., WEBB,
S. V., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Studies of the cat’s
medial interlaminar
nucleus: a subdivision
of the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus. J. Comp. Neural.
181: 601-614,
1978.
KUBOTA,
T. MORIMOTO,
M. KANASEKI,
T., AND INOMATA,
H. Visual pretectal neurons projecting
to the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus and pulvinar
nucleus in the cat. Brain Res. Bull. 20: 573-579,
1988.
KUFFLER,
S. W., NICHOLLS,
J. G., AND MARTIN,
A. R. From Neuron To
Brain. Sunderland,
MA: Sinauer Associates,
1984, p. 323-360.
KULTAS-ILINSKY,
K. AND ILINSKY, I. A. Fine structure of the ventrolateral
nucleus (VL) of Macaca mulatta thalamus: cell types and synaptology.
J. Comp. Neural. 313: 319-349,
1991.
KULTAS-ILINSKY,
K. ILINSKY, I. A., YOUNG, P. A., AND SMITH, K. R. Ultrastructure of degenerating
cerebellothalamic
terminals in the ventral medial nucleus of the cat. Exp. Brain Res. 38: 125- 135, 1980.
KUNZLE,
H. Thalamic
projections
from the precentral
cortex in Macaca
fascicularis.
Brain Res. 105: 253-267,
1976.
KWON, Y. H., ESGUERRA,
M., AND SUR, M. NMDA
and non-NMDA
receptors mediate visual responses of neurons in the cat’s lateral geniculate
nucleus. J. Neurophysiol.
66: 414-428,
199 1.
LEE, K. H. AND MCCORMICK,
D. A. Acetylcholine
excites GABAergic
neurons of the ferret perigeniculate
nucleus through nicotinic
receptors.
J. Neurophysiol.
73: 2123-2128,
1995.
LE GROS CLARK,
W. E. The structure
and connections
of the thalamus.
Brain 55: 406-470,
1932.
LENNIE,
P. Perceptual
signs of parallel pathways.
Philos. Trans. R. Sot.
Lond. BioZ. Sci. 290: 23-37,
1980.
LEVAY,
S. AND SHERK, H. The visual claustrum of the cat. I. Structure and
connections.
J. Neurosci.
1: 956-980,
198 1.
LIN, C. S. AND KAAS,
J. H. Projections
from cortical visual areas 17, 18,
and MT onto the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus in owl monkeys.
J.
Comp. Neural.
173: 457-474,
1977.
LINDSTR~M,
S. Synaptic organization
of inhibitory
pathways
to principal
cells in the lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat. Brain Res. 234: 447453, 1982.
LIU, X.-B., HONDA,
C. N., AND JONES, E. G. Distribution
of four types of
synapse on physiologically
identified relay neurons in the ventral posterior thalamic nucleus of the cat. J. Comp. Neural. 352: 69-91,
1995a.
LIU, X.-B.,
WARREN,
R. A., AND JONES, E. G. Synaptic distribution
of
afferents from reticular nucleus in ventroposterior
nucleus of cat thalamus. J. Comp. Neural. 352: 187-202,
1995b.
LIVINGSTONE,
M. S. AND HUBEL,
D. H. Effects of sleep and arousal on the
processing of visual information
in the cat. Nature Lond. 29 1: 554-561,
1981.
LLINAS,
R. The intrinsic electrophysiological
properties of mammalian
neurons: insights into central nervous system. Science Wash. DC 242: 16541664, 1988.
Lo, F.-S., Lu, S.-M., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Intracellular
and extracellular
in vivo recording
of different response modes for relay cells of the cat’s
lateral geniculate
nucleus. Exp. Brain Res. 83: 3 17-328,
1991.
Lo, F.-S. AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Feedback
inhibition
in the cat’s lateral
geniculate nucleus. Exp. Brain Res. 100: 365-368,
1994.
LOZSADI,
D. A. Organization
of cortical
afferents
to the rostral, limbic
sector of the rat thalamic reticular nucleus. J. Comp. Neural. 341: 520533, 1994.
LozsAor,
D. A. Organization
of connections
between the thalamic reticular
nucleus and the anterior thalamic nuclei in the rat. J. Comp. Neural. 358:
233-246,
1995.
LOZSADI,
D. A., GONZALEZ-SORIANO,
J., AND GUILLERY,
R. W. The course
and the termination
of corticothalamic
fibres arising in the visual cortex
of the rat. Eur. J. Neurosci.
In press.
Lu, S.-M., GUIDO, W., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. The brainstem
parabrachial
region controls mode of response to visual stimulation
of neurons in the
cat’s lateral geniculate nucleus. Visual Neurosci.
10: 63 l-642,
1993.
LUND,
J. S., LUND, R. D., HENDRICKSON,
A. E., BUNT, A. H., AND FUCHS,
A. F. The origin of efferent pathways
from the primary
visual cortex,
KLECKNER,

THALAMIC
area 17, of the macaque monkey
as shown by retrograde
transport
of
horseradish
peroxidase.
J. Camp. Neural.
164: 287-304,
1975.
MA, W., PESCHANSKI,
M., AND RALSTON, H. J. III. The differential
synaptic
organization
of the spinal and lemniscal
projections
to the ventrobasal
comples of the rat thalamus. Evidence
for convergence
of two systems
upon single thalamic neurons. Neuroscience
22: 925-934,
1987.
MACMILLAN,
N. A. AND CREELMAN,
C. D. Detection
Theory: A User’s
Guide. Cambridge:
Cambridge
University
Press, 199 1.
MAIOLI,
M. G., GALLETTI,
C., SQUATRITO,
S., BATTAGLINI,
P. P., AND
SANSEVERINO,
E. R. Projections
from the cortex of the superior temporal
sulcus to the dorsal lateral and pregeniculate
nuclei in the macaque monkey. Arch. Ital. Biol. 122: 301-309,
1984.
MAJOROSSY,
K. AND KISS, A., Specific patterns of neuron arrangement
and
of synaptic articulation
in the medial geniculate
body. Exp. Brain Res.
26: l-17,
1976.
MASON,
C. A. AND ROBSON, J. A. Morphology
of retino-geniculate
axons
in the cat. Neuroscience
4: 79-97,
1979.
MATHERS,
L. H. Tectal projection
to the posterior thalamus of the squirrel
monkey.
Brain Res. 35: 295-298,
1971.
MATHERS,
L. H. The synaptic organization
of the cortical projection
to the
pulvinar
of the squirrel monkey.
J. Camp. Neural.
146: 43-60,
1972.
MAYER,
M. L., VYKLICKY,
L., JR., AND CLEMENTS,
J. Regulation
of NMDA
receptor desensitization
in mouse hippocampal
neurons by glycine. Nature Lond. 338: 425-427,
1989.
MAYER,
M. L. AND WESTBROOK,
G. L. The physiology
of excitatory
amino
acids in the vertebrate
central nervous system. Prog. Neurobiol.
28: 197276, 1987.
MCCARLEY,
R. W., BENOIT, O., AND BARRIONUEVO,
G. Lateral geniculate
nucleus unitary discharge in sleep and waking:
state- and rate-specific
aspects. J. Neurophysiol.
50: 798-8 18, 1983.
MCCLURKIN,
J. W., OPTICAN, L. M., AND RICHMOND,
B. J. Cortical feedback
increases visual information
transmitted
by monkey parvocellular
lateral
geniculate nucleus neurons. Visual Neurosci.
1 1: 601-6 17, 1994.
MCCLURKIN,
J. W. AND MARROCCO,
R. T. Visual cortical input alters spatial
tuning in monkey lateral geniculate nucleus cells. J. Physiol. Lond. 348:
135-152,
1984.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. Cholinergic
and noradrenergic
modulation
of thalamocortical processing.
Trends Neurosci.
12: 215 -22 1, 1989.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. Membrane
properties
and neurotransmitter
actions. In:
The Synaptic Organization
of the Brain (3rd ed.), edited by G. M. Shepherd. New York: Oxford
University
Press, 1990, p. 32-66.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. Functional
properties of a slowly inactivating
potassium
current in guinea pig dorsal lateral geniculate
relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 66:1176-1189,
1991.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. Neurotransmitter
actions in the thalamus and cerebral
cortex and their role in neuromodulation
of thalamocortical
activity. Prog.
Neurobiol.
39: 337-388,
1992.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND BAL, T. Sensory gating mechanisms
of the thalamus. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
4: 550-556,
1994.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND FEESER, H. R. Functional
implications
of burst
firing and single spike activity in lateral geniculate relay neurons. Neuroscience 39: 103-113,
1990.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND HUGUENARD,
J. R. A model of the electrophysiological properties
of thalamocortical
relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol.
68:
1384-1400,
1992.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND PAPE, H.-C. Acetycholine
inhibits identified interneurons in the cat lateral geniculate
nucleus. Nature Lond. 334: 246248, 1988.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND PAPE, H.-C. Properties
of a hyperpolarizationactivated cation current and its role in rhythmic
oscillation
in thalamic
relay neurones. J. Physiol. Lond. 43 1: 29 l-3 18, 1990.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND PRINCE, D. A. Acetylcholine
induces burst firing
in thalamic
reticular neurones by activating
a potassium
conductance.
Nature Lond. 319: 402-405,
1986.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND PRINCE,
D. A. Actions
of acetylcholine
in the
guinea-pig
and cat medial and lateral geniculate nuclei, in vitro. J. Physiol. Lond. 392: 147- 165, 1987.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND VON KROSIGK, M. Corticothalamic
activation modulates thalamic firing through glutamate ‘ ‘metabotropic”
receptors. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89: 2774-2778,
1992.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND WANG,
Z. Serotonin
and noradrenaline
excite
GABAergic
neurones in the guinea-pig
and cat nucleus reticularis
thalami. J. Physiol. Lond. 442: 235-255,
1991.
MITROFANIS,
J. Development
of the thalamic
reticular
nucleus in ferrets

RELAY
with special reference to the perigeniculate
and perireticular
cell groups.
Eur. J. Neurosci.
6: 253-263,
1994.
MITROFANIS,
J. AND GUILLERY,
R. W. New views on the thalamic reticular
nucleus in the adult and the developing
brain. Trends Neurosci.
16: 240245, 1993.
MONTERO,
V. M. Localization
of gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA)
in
type 3 cells and demonstration
of their source to F2 terminals in the cat
lateral geniculate nucleus: a golgi-electron-microscopic
GABA-immunocytochemical
study. J. Cornp. Neural. 254: 228-245,
1986.
MONTERO,
V. M. Ultrastructural
identification
of synaptic terminals
from
the axon type 3 interneurons
in the cat lateral geniculate
nucleus.
J.
Comp. Neurol. 264: 268-283,
1987.
MONTERO,
V. M. The GABA-immunoreactive
neurons in the interlaminar
regions of the cat lateral geniculate
nucleus: light and electron microscopic observations.
Exp. Brain Res. 75: 497-5 12, 1989.
MONTERO,
V. M. A quantitative
study of synaptic contacts on interneurons
and relay cells of the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. Exp. Brain Res. 86:
257-270,
1991.
MONTERO,
V. M. Quantitative
immunogold
evidence for enrichment
of
glutamate but not aspartate in synaptic terminals of retino-geniculate
and
cortico-geniculate
axons in the cat. Visual Neurosci.
I 1: 675-68 I, 1994.
MONTERO,
V. M. AND SCOTT, G. L. Synaptic terminals in the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus from neurons of the thalamic reticular nucleus: a light
and electron microscope
autoradiographic
study. Neuroscience
6: 256 l2577, 1981.
MONTERO,
V. M. GUILLERY,
R. W., AND WOOLSEY
C. N. Retinotopic
organization within the thalamic reticular nucleus demonstrated
by the double
label autoradiographic
technique.
Brain Res. 138: 407-42 1, 1977.
MOODY,
C. 1. AND SILLITO, A. M. The role of the N-methyl-n-aspartate
(NMDA)
receptor in the transmission
of visual information
in the feline
dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus (dLGN).
J. Physiol. Lond. 396: 62P,
1988.
MOREST,
D. K. Synaptic relationships
of Golgi type II cells in the medial
geniculate body of the cat. J. Camp. Neural.
162: 157- 193, 1975.
MOTT, D. D. AND LEWIS,
D. V. The pharmacology
and function of central
GABAB
receptors. Int. Rev. Neurobiol.
36: 97-223,
1994.
MOUNTCASTLE,
V. B. Neural mechanisms in somesthesis. In: Medical Physiology, edited by V. B. Mountcastle.
St. Louis: Mosby,
1980a, p. 348390.
MOUNTCASTLE,
V. B. Central nervous mechanisms
in hearing. In: Medical
Physiology,
edited by V. B. Mountcastle.
St. Louis: Mosby,
1980b, p.
457-480.
MOUNTCASTLE,
V. B., POGGIO, G. F., AND WERNER,
G. The relation of
thalamic
cell responses to peripheral
stimuli varied over an intensive
continuum.
J. Neurophysiol.
26: 807 - 834, 1963.
MUKHERJEE,
P. AND KAPLAN,
E. Dynamics
of neurons in the cat lateral
geniculate nucleus: in vivo electrophysiology
and computational
modeling. J. Neurophysiol.
74: 1222- 1243, 1995.
NAKAMURA,
H., GATTASS, R., DESIMONE,
R., AND UNGERLEIDER,
L. G. The
modular organization
of projections
from areas VI and V2 to areas V4
and TEO in macaques. J. Neurosci.
13: 3681-3691,
1993.
NELSON,
S. B. AND LE VAY, S. Topographic
organization
of the optic
radiation of the cat. J. Camp. Neural. 240: 322-330,
1985.
NICHOLLS,
D. AND ATTWELL,
D. The release and uptake of excitatory
amino
acids. Trends Pharmacol.
11: 462-468,
1990.
NICHOLSON,
C. AND RICE, M. E. Diffusion
of ions and transmitters
in the
brain cell microenvironment.
In: Volume Transmission
In The Brain:
Novel Mechanisms
For Neural
Transmission,
edited by K. Fuxe and
L. F. Agnati. New York: Raven, 1991.
NIIMI,
K., MIKI, M., AND KAWAMURA,
S. Ascending
projections
of the
superior colliculus
in the cat. Okajimas
Folia Anat. Jpn. 47: 269-289,
1970.
NISSL,, F. Die Grosshirnantheile
des Kanninchcns.
Arch. Psychiat. Nervenkr.
52: 867-953,
1913.
OGREN, M. P. AND HENDRICKSON,
A. E. The morphology
and distribution
of striate cortex terminals in the inferior and lateral subdivisions
of the
Macaca monkey pulvinar.
J. Camp. Neural.
188: 179-200,
1979.
OJIMA, H. Terminal
morphology
and distribution
of corticothalamic
fibers
originating
from layers 5 and 6 of cat primary
auditory
cortex. Cereh.
Cortex 4: 646-663,
1994.
PAR& D., SMITH, Y., PARENT,
A., AND STERIADE, M. Projections
of brainstem core cholinergic
and non-cholinergic
neurons of cat to intralaminar
and reticular thalamic nuclei. Neuroscience
25: 69-86,
1988.
PAPE, H.-C., BUDDE,
T., MAGER,
R., AND KISVARDAY,
Z. F. Prevention
of

1394

S. M. SHERMAN

AND R. W. GUILLERY

Ca2+-mediated action potentials in GABAergic local circuit neurones of
rat thalamus by a transient K + current. J. Physiol. Lond. 478: 403 -422,
1994.
PAPE, H.-C. AND MAGER,
R. Nitric oxide controls oscillatory activity in
thalamocortical neurons. Neuron 9: 441-448, 1992.
PAPE, H.-C. AND MCCORMICK,
D. A. Noradrenaline and serotonin selectively

modulate

thalamic

burst firing

by enhancing

a hyperpolarization-

activated cation current. Nature Lond. 340: 7 15 -718, 1989.
PAPE, H.-C. AND MCCORMICK,
D. A. Electrophysiological and pharmacological properties of interneurons in the cat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. Neuroscience
68: 1105 1125, 1995.
PESCHANSKI,
M., RALSTON H. J., AND ROUDIER, F. Reticularis thalami afferents to the ventrobasal complex of the rat thalamus: an electron microscope study.

Brain

Res. 270: 325 --329,

1983.

G. I?. AND MOUNTCASTLE,

V. B. The functional

properties

of ven-

trobasal thalamic units studied in unanesthetized monkeys. J. Neurophysiol. 26: 775-806,
1963.
POLYAK,
S. The Vertebrate
Visual System. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1957, p. l-1390.
PREUSS, T. M., BECK, P. D., AND KAAS, J. H. Areal, modular, and connectional organization of visual cortex in a prosimian primate, the slow loris
(Nycticebus

coucang).

Brain

Behav.

Evol.

42: 321-335,

1993.

D., HAMOS,

J. E., AND SHERMAN,

S. M. Synaptic

circuitry

field projection

and magnification

factors

H. E., Lu, S.-M.,

GUIDO,

W., ADAMS,

P. R., AND SHERMAN,

S. M. N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors contribute to excitatory
postsynaptic potentials of cat lateral geniculate neurons recorded in thalamic slices. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87: 4548-4552,
1990.
SCHMIELAU,

F. AND

SINGER,

W. The

role of visual

cortex

for binocular

interactions in the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. Brain Res. 120: 354361, 1977.
SCHUMAN,
E. 141.AND MADISON,
D. V. A requirement for the intercellular
messenger nitric oxide in long-term potentiation. Science Wash. DC 254:
1503-1506, 1991.
SCHUMAN,
E. M. AND MADISON, D. V. Nitric oxide and synaptic function.
Rev. Neurosci.

17: 153-183,

1994.

M. L., DEKKER, J. J., AND GOLDMAN-RAKIC,
P. S. Dual mode
of corticothalamic termination in the mediodorsal nucleus of the rhesus
monkey. J. Comp. Neural. 309: 289-304,
1991.

SCHWARTZ,

SHATZ, C. J., GHOSH, A., MCCONNELL,

of physiologically identified W-cells in the cat’s dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus. J. Neurosci. 8: 31-48, 1987.

columns

in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. Exp. Brain Res. 13: 159- 177,
1971b.

Annu.

D. AND FITZPATRICK, D. Organization of cholinergic synapses
in the cat’s dorsal lateral geniculate and perigeniculate nuclei. J. Comp.
Neural. 288: 676-690, 1989.

RACZKOWSKI,

RACZKOWSKI,

K. J. Visual

SANDERSON,

SCHARFMAN,

D., BOURASSA,
J., AND DESCH~NES,
M. The axonal arborization
of single thalamic reticular neurons in the somatosensory thalamus of
the rat. Eur. J. Neurosci. 7: 31-40, 1995.

PINAULT,

POGGIO,

P.-A. AND B~LLIER,
J. Corticocortical connections in the visual
system: Structure and function. Physiol. Rev. 75: 107- 154, 1995.
SALT, T. E, Excitatory aminoc acid receptors and synaptic transmission in
the rat ventrobasal thalamus. J. Physiol. Lond. 391: 490-5 10, 1987.
SALT, T. E. AND EATON,
S. A. Function of non-NMDA receptors and
NMDA receptors in synaptic responses to natural somatosensory stimulation in the ventrobasal
thalamus. Exp. Brain Res. 77: 646-652,
1989.
SANDERSON,
K. J. The projection of the visual field to the lateral geniculate
and medial interlaminar nuclei in the cat. J. Comp. Neural. 143: 10 l118, 1971a.

SALIN,

S. K., ALLENDORFER,

K. L., FRIAUF,

to

E., AND ANTONINI, A. Subplate neurons and the development of neocortical
connections. In: Development
Of The Visual System,-edited by D. M-K.
Lam and C. J. Shatz. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991, p. 175-196.
SHERMAN,
S. M. Functional organization of the W-, X-, and Y-cell pathways
in the cat: a review and hypothesis. In: Progress in Psychobiology
and
Physiological
Psychology,
edited by Anonymous. New York: Academic

H. J., III Local circuitry of the somatosensory thalamus in the
processing of sensory information. In: Progress in Brain Research, edited
by G. Holstege. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1991, vol. 87, p. 13-28.
RALSTON,
H. J., III Evidence for presynaptic dendrites and a proposal for
their mechanism of action. Nature Lond. 230: 585-587,
1971.
RALSTON, H. J., III AND RALSTON,
D. D. Local circuit processing in the

S. M. Dynamic gating of retinal transmission to the visual cortex
by the lateral geniculate nucleus. In: Thalamic Networks For Relay And
Modulation, edited by D. Minciacchi, M. Molinari, G. Macchi and E. G.
Jones. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1993, p. 61-79.
SHERMAN,
S. M. AND FRIEDLANDER,
M. J. Identification of X versus Y
properties for interneurons in the A-laminae of the cat’s lateral geniculate

RALL, W. Core conductor theory and cable properties of neurons. In: Handbook of Physiology.
The Nervous
System. Cellular Biology of Neurons.

Washington, DC: Am. Physiol. Sot., 1977, sect. 1, vol. I, p. 39-97.
RALSTON, H. J., III The synaptic organization of lemniscal projections
the ventrobasal
thalamus of the cat. Brain Rex 14: 99- 116, 1969.
RALSTON,

primate thalamus: neurotransmitter
mechanisms.
In: Thalamic Networks
For Relay And Modulation,
edited by D. Minciacchi, M. Molinari,

G. Macchi, and E. G. Jones. Oxford: Pergamon, 1993, p. 109-122.
J. P., RUSSCHEN,
F. T., FULLER, T. A., AND PRICE J. L. Sources
of presumptive glutamatergic /aspartatergic afferents to the mediodorsal
nucleus of the thalamus in the rat. J. Comp. Neural. 320: 435-456,
1992.
RICHARD,
D., GIOANNI, Y., KITSIKIS, A., AND BUSER, P. A study of geniculate unit activity during cryogenic blockade of the primary visual cortex
in the cat. Exp. Brain Res. 221235-242,
1975.
RINVIK,
E. The corticothalamic projection from the pericruciate and coronal
gyri in the cat. An experimental study with silver-impregnation methods.
RAY,

Brain Res. 10: 79-119,
1968.
ROBSON, J. A. The morphology

of corticofugal axons to the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus in the cat. J. Comp. Neural. 216: x9-103, 1983.

RORSON,

J. A. AND HALL,

W. C. The organization

of the pulvinar

in the

grey squirrel (Sciureus carolinensis) . II. Synaptic organization and comparison with the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Comp. Neural. 173:
389-416, 1977.
ROCKLAND,

K. S. Further evidence for two types of corticopulvinar
5: 1865 - 1868, 1994.

neurons.

Press, 1985, vol.

11, p. 233-314.

SHERMAN,

nucleus.
SHERMAN,

Exp. Brain

Rex 73: 384-392,

1988.

S. M. AND KOCH, C. The control of retinogeniculate transmission
in the mammalian lateral geniculate nucleus. Exp. Brain Res. 63: l-20,
1986.

SHERMAN, S. M. AND KOCH, C. Thalamus. In: The Synaptic
of the Brain (3rd ed.), edited by G. M. Shepherd. New

Organization

York: Oxford

University Press, 1990, p. 246-278.
S. M., NORTON, T. T., AND CASAGRANDE, V. A. X- and Y-cells
in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the tree shrew (Tupaia glis).

SHERMAN,
Brain

Rex

93: 152-157,
1975.
Y., AND SUMIMOTO,
the rat thalamic reticular nucleus. Brain

A. KAYAMA,

SHOSAKU,

I. Somatotopic organization in
Res. 3 11: 57-64,

1984.

A. M., JONES, H. E., GERSTEIN, G. L., AND WEST, D. C. Featurelinked synchronization of thalamic relay cell firing induced by feedback
from the visual cortex. Nature Lond. 369: 479-482,
1994.
SILLITO, A. M., MURPHY, P. C., SALT, T. E., AND MOODY,
C. I. Dependence
of retinogeniculate transmission in cat on NMDA receptors. J. Neurophysiol. 63: 347-355,
1990.

SILLITO,

SMITH,

Y.,

PA&,

D.,

DESCH~~NES,

M.,

PARENT,

A.,

AND

STERIADE,

K. S. AND PANDYA, D. N. Cortical connections of the occipital
lobe in the rhesus monkey: interconnections between areas 17, 18, 19
and the superior temporal sulcus. Brain Res. 212: 249-270, 1981.
ROGAWSKI,
M. A. The A-current: How ubiquitous a feature of excitable
cells is it? Trends Neurosci.
8: 214-219,
1985.

M. Cholinergic and non-cholinergic projections from the upper brainstem
core to the visual thalamus in the cat. Exp. Brain Res. 70: 166- 180, 1988.
SNYDER, S. H. Nitric oxide and neurons. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
2: 323327, 1992.
So, Y. T. AND SHAPLEY, R. Spatial properties of X and Y cells in the lateral
geniculate nucleus of the cat and conduction velocities of their inputs.

ROSE, J. E. The ontogenetic
development
of the rabbit’s diencephalon.
J.
Camp. Neural. 77: 61-129,
1942.
ROSE, J. E. AND MOUNTCASTLE,
V. M. The thalamic
tactile region in the
rabbit and cat. J. Comp. Neural. 97: 441-489,
1952.
ROUILLER, E. M. AND WELKER, E. Morphology
of corticothalamic
terminals
arising from the auditory cortex of the rat: a Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin (PHA-L)
tracing study. Hear. Res. 56: 179- 190, 199 1.

kxp. Brain Res. 36: 533-550,
SOLT&SZ, I. AND CRUNELLI, V.
receptor-mediated
responses
Res. 90: 151-169,
1992.
SOMOGYI, G., HAJDU, F. AND
ventral and anterior medial
31: 417-431,
1978.

Neuroreport
ROCKLAND,

1979.
GABAA and pre- and post-synaptic
GABA, in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Frog. Brain
-

T~MB~L,
T. Ultrastructure
nuclei of the cat thalamus.

L

of the anterior
Exp. Brain Res.

THALAMIC
R., FRESSONI, C., REGONDI,
M. C., ARCELLI,
P., AND DE BIASI,
S. Interneurons
in the mammalian
thalamus. In: Thalamic Networks
For
Relay And Modulation,
edited by D. Minciacchi,
M. Molinari,
G. Macchi,
and E. G. Jones. Oxford:
Pergamon,
1993, p. 17-28.
SQUATRITO,
S ., MAIOLI, M. G., GALLETTI,
C., AND B ATTAGLINI,
P. P. Some
extra-striate
corticothalamic
connections
in macaque monkeys.
Prog.
Brain Res. 75: 279-292,
1988.
STANFORD,
L. R., FRIEDLANDER,
M. J., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Morphology
of physiologically
identified W-cells in the C laminae of the cat’s lateral
geniculate nucleus. J. Neurosci.
1: 578-584,
1981.
STANFORD,
L. R., FRIEDLANDER,
M. J., AND S HERMAN , S. M. Morphological
and phys iological properties of geni culate W-cells of the cat: a comparison with X- and Y-cells.
J. Neurophysiol.
50: 582-608,
1983.
STARR, A . AND DON, M. Responses of squirrel
monkey
(Samiri sciureus >
medial geniculate
units to binaural
click stimuli.
J. Neurophysiol.
35:
501-517,
1972.
STEPNIEWSKA,
I., PREUSS, T. M., AND KAAS, J. H. Thalamic
connections
of the primary
motor cortex (Ml ) of owl monkeys.
J. Comp. Neural.
349: 558-582,
1994.
STERIADE,
M., JONES, E. G., AND LLINAS,
R. Thalumic
Oscillations
And
Signalling.
New York: Wiley, 1990.
STERIADE,
M. Basic mechanisms
of sleep generation.
Neurology
42: 9- 18,
1992.
STERIADE,
M. AND CONTRERAS,
D. Relations between cortical and thalamic
cellular events during transition from sleep patterns to paroxysmal
activity. J. Neurosci.
15: 623-642,
1995.
STERIADE,
M. AND LLINAS,
R. The functional
states of the thalamus and
the associated neuronal interplay.
Physiol. Rev. 68: 649-742,
1988.
STERIADE,
M. AND MCCARLEY,
R. W. Brainstem
Control of Wakefulness
And Sleep. New York: Plenum Press, 1990.
STERIADE,
M., MCCORMICK,
D. A., AND SEJNOWSKI,
T. J. Thalamocortical
oscillations
in the sleeping and aroused brain. Science Wash. DC 262:
679-685,
1993.
STONE, J. Parallel
Processing
In The Visual System. New York: Plenum
Press, 1983.
STORM, J. F. Potassium currents in hippocampal
pyramidal
cells. [Review].
Prog. Brain Res. 83: 161-187,
1990.
SUR, M., ESGUERRA,
M., GARRAGHTY,
P. E., KRITZER, M. F., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Morphology
of physiologically
identified retinogeniculate
X- and
Y-axons in the cat. J. Neurophysiol.
58: l-32,
1987.
SWANSON,
L. W. AND HARTMAN,
B. K. The central adrenergic
system. An
immunofluorescence
study of the location of cell bodies and their efferent
connections
in the rat utilising dopamine-P-hydroxylase
as a marker.
J.
Comp. Neural.
163: 467-506,
1975.
SZENTAGOTHAI,
J. The structure of the synapse in the lateral geniculate
body. Acta Anat. 55: 166-185,
1963.
SZENTAGOTHAI,
J ., HAMORI,
J., AND Tii MB~L, T. Degeneration
and electron
microscope
analysis of the synaptic glomeruli
in the lateral geniculate
body. Exp. Brain Res. 2: 283-301,
1966.
TAMAMAKI,
N., UHLRICH,
D. J., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Morphology
of physiologically
identified
retinal X and Y axons in the cat’s thalamus and
midbrain
as revealed
by intra-axonal
injection
of biocytin.
J. Comp.
Neural. 354: 583-607,
1994.
THOMSON,
A. M., WALKER,
V. E., AND FLYNN,
D. M. Glycine enhances
NMDA-receptor
mediated synaptic potentials in neocortical
slices. Nuture Lond. 338: 422-424,
1989.
To~;;~BoE, T. Two types of short axon (Golgi 2nd) interneurons
in the specific
thalamic nuclei. Actu Morph. Acad. Sci. Hung. 17: 285-297,
1969.
TORREALBA,
F., PARTLOW,
G. D., AND GUILLERY,
R. W. Organization
of
the projection
from the superior colliculus to the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat. Neuroscience
6: 1341- 1360, 1981.
TROY, J. B. Spatio-temporal
interaction
in neurones of the cat’s dorsal
lateral geniculate nucleus. J. Physiol. Lond. 344: 419-432,
1983.
TSUMOTO, T., CREUTZFELDT,
0. D., AND LEGENDY,
C. R. Functional
organization of the cortifugal
system from visual cortex to lateral geniculate
nucleus in the cat. Exp. Brain Res. 32: 345-364,
1978.
TSUMOTO, T. AND SUDA, K. Three groups of cortico-geniculate
neurons and
their distribution
in binocular
and monocular
segments of cat striate
cortex. J. Comp. Neural.
193: 223-236,
1980.
UHLRICH,
D. J., CUCCHIARO,
J. B., HUMPHREY,
A. L., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Morphology
and axonal projection
patterns of individual
neurons
in the cat perigeniculate
nucleus. J. Neurophysiol.
65: 1528 - 154 1, 199 1.
SPREAFICO,

RELAY

1395

D. J., CUCCHIARO,
J. B., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. The projection of
individual axons from the parabrachial region of the brainstem to the dorsal
lateral geniculate nucleus in the cat. J. Neurosci. 8: 4565-4575,
1988.
UHLRICH,
D. J. AND MANNING,
K. A. The projection
of individual
axons
from the pretectum
to the dorsal lateral geniculate
complex in the cat.
J. Comp. Neurol. 363: 147-159,
1995.
UHLRICH,
D. J., MANNING,
K. A., AND PIENKOWSKI,
T. P. The histaminergic
innervation
of the lateral geniculate complex in the cat. Visual Neurosci.
10: 225-235,
1993.
UPDYKE,
B. V. The patterns of projection
of cortical areas 17, 18, and 19
onto the lamin ae of the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus in the cat. J.
Comp. Neural. 163: 377 -396, 1975.
UPDYKE,
B. V. Topographic
organization
of the projections
from cortical
areas 17, 18, and 19 onto the thalamus, pretectum
and superior colliculs
in the cat. J. Comp. Neural.
173: 81-l 22, 1977.
VAN ESSEN,
D. C. Functional
organization
of primate visual cortex. In:
Cerebral
Cortex, edited by A. Peters and E. G. Jones. New York: Plenum,
1985, vol. 3, p. 259-329.
VAN ESSEN, D. C., ANDERSON,
C. H., AND FELLEMAN,
D. J. Information
processing in the primate visual system an integrated
systems perspective. Science Wash. DC 255: 419-423,
992.
VAN ESSEN, D. C., FELLEMAN,
D. J., DEYOE,
E. A., OLVARRIA,
J., AND
KNIERIM,
J. J. Modular
and hierarchical
organi zation of extrastriate
visual
cortex in the macaque monkey.
Cold Spring Harbor
Symp. Quant. Biol.
55: 679-696,
1990.
VAN ESSEN, D. C. AND MAUNSELL,
J. H. R. Hierarchical
organization
and
functional streams in the visual cortex. Trends Neurosci. 6: 370-375,
1983.
Z. AND HAMORI,
J. Quantitative
electron microscopic
analyVIDNYANSZKY,
sis of synaptic input from cortical areas 17 and 18 to the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus in cats. J. Comp. Neural. 349: 259-268,
1994.
VON FLECHSIG,
P. Weitere
Mittheilungen
uber den Stabkranz
des
Menschlichen
Gehims. Neural. Centralblatt,
15: 2-4, 1896.
VON KROSIGK,
M., BAL, T., AND MCCORMICK,
D. A. Cellular mechanisms
of a synchronized
oscillation
in the thalamus.
Science Wash. DC 26 1:
361-364,
1993.
WAHLE,
P., STUPHORN,
V., SCHMIDT,
M., AND HOFFMANN,
K. P. LGNprojecting
neurons of cat’s pretectum
express glutamic acid. Eur. J. Neurosci. 6: 452-460,
1994.
WALKER,
A. E. The Primate Thalamus. Chgicago, IL: University
of Chicago
Press, 1938, p. l-319.
WALLS,
G. L. The lateral geniculate nucleus and visual histophysiology.
Public. Physiol. 9: I- 100, 1953.
WEBER,
A. J. AND KALIL, R. E. Development
of corticogeniculate
synapses
in the cat. J. Comp. Neurol. 264: 17 1 - 192, 1987.
WEBER,
A. J., KALIL, R. E., AND BEHAN, M. Synaptic connections
between
corticogeniculate
axons and interneurons
in the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus of the cat. J. Comp. Neural. 289: 156- 164, 1993.
WELKER,
W. I. Principles
of organization
of the ventrobasal
complex
in
mammals.
Brain Behav. Evol. 7: 253-336,
1973.
WILSON,
J. R., FRIEDLANDER,
M. J., AND SHERMAN,
S. M. Fine structural
morphology
of identified
X- and Y-cells in the cat’s lateral geniculate
nucleus. Proc. Roy. Sot. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 221: 4 11-436,
1984.
WILSON,
P. D., ROWE, M. H., AND STONE, J. Properties
of relay cells in
cat’s lateral geniculate nucleus: a comparison
of W-cells with X- and Ycells. J. Neurophysiol.
39: 1193 - 1209, 1976.
WONG-RILEY,
M. T. T. Neuronal
and synaptic organization
of the normal
dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the squirrel monkey, Saimiri sciureus.
J. Comp. Neural.
144: 25-60,
1972a.
WONG-RILEY,
M. T. T. Terminal
degeneration
and glial reactions in the
lateral geniculate
nucleus of the squirrel monkey
after eye removal.
J.
Comp. Neural.
144: 61-92,
1972b.
YOUNG, A. B., PENNEY, J. B., DAUTH, G. W., BROMBERG,
M. B., AND GILMAN,
S. Glutamate or aspartate as a possible neurotransmitter
of cerebral corticofugal fibers in the monkey. Neurology
33: 1513- 1516, 1983.
YOUNG,
M. P. Objective
analysis of the topological
organization
of the
primate cortical visual system. Nuture Lond. 358: 152- 155, 1992.
YUAN, B. MORROW,
T. J., AND CASEY, K. L. Responsiveness
of ventrobasal
thalamic neurons after suppression
of S 1 cortex in the anaesthetized
rat.
J. Neurosci.
5: 2971-2978,
1985.
ZEKI, S. A Vision of The Brain. Oxford:
Blackwell
Scientific,
1993, p. l366.
ZEKI, S. AND SHIPP, S. The functional
logic of cortical connections.
Nature
Lond. 335: 311-317,
1988.
UHLRICH,

