653

J. Physiol. (1987), 383, pp. 653-692
With 17 text-figure and I plate
Printed in Great Britain

PASSIVE CABLE PROPERTIES AND MORPHOLOGICAL CORRELATES
OF NEURONES IN THE LATERAL GENICULATE NUCLEUS
OF THE CAT

BY STEWART A. BLOOMFIELD, JAMES E. HAMOS
AND S. MURRAY SHERMAN
From the Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, State University of New York,
Stony Brook, NY 11794, U.S.A.

(Received 15 November 1985)
SUMMARY

1. We used an in vivo preparation of the cat to study the passive cable properties
of sixteen X and twelve Y cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Cells were modelled
as equivalent cylinders according to Rall's formulations (Rall, 1959a, 1969, 1977).
We injected intracellular current pulses into these geniculate neurones, and we
analysed the resulting voltage transients to obtain the cable parameters of these cells.
In addition, fifty-four physiologically characterized neurones were labelled with
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and analysed morphologically.
2. Analysis of HRP-labelled geniculate neurones showed that the dendritic
branching pattern of these cells adheres closely to the 2 power rule. That is, at each
branch point, the diameter of the parent branch raised to the 2 power equals the
sum of the diameters of the daughter dendrites after each is raised to the 2 power.
Furthermore, preliminary data indicate that the dendritic terminations emanating
from each primary dendrite occur at the same electrotonic distance from the soma.
These observations suggest that both X and Y cells meet the geometric constraints
necessary for reduction of their dendritic arbors into equivalent cylinders.
3. We found a strong linear relationship between the diameter of each primary
dendrite and the membrane surface area of the arbor emanating from it. We used
this relationship to derive an algorithm for determining the total somatic and
dendritic membrane surface area of an X or Y cell simply from knowledge of the
diameters of its soma and primary dendrites.
4. Both geniculate X and Y cells display current-voltage relationships that were
linear within + 20 mV of the resting membrane potential. This meant that we could
easily remain within the linear voltage range during the voltage transient analyses.
5. X and Y cells clearly differ in terms of many of their electrical properties,
including input resistance, membrane time constant and electrotonic length. The
difference in input resistance between X and Y cells cannot be attributed solely to
the smaller average size of X cells, but it also reflects a higher specific membrane
resistance (Rm) of the X cells. Furthermore, X cells exhibit electrotonic lengths
slightly larger than those of Y cells, but both neuronal types display electrotonic
lengths of roughly 1. This indicates that even the most distally located innervation
to these cells should have considerable influence on their somatic and axonal
responses.

654

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. Mf. SHERMAN

6. The relationship between membrane time constant and electrotonic length
suggests that the Y cell population has rather uniform dendritic geometry (i.e. they
are scaled in size) whereas X cells are more variable in terms of their dendritic
geometry. This finding agrees with morphological data reported here and by others
(Friedlander, Lin, Stanford & Sherman, 1981).
7. We utilized an expression derived from the equivalent cylinder model to
calculate the specific membrane capacitance (Cm) for eight neurones that were studied
biophysically and subsequently labelled with HRP. Both X and Y cells display
similar values for Cm, with a mean for the eight neurones of 1P86 /tF/cm2. With the
assumption of a constant Cm for all geniculate cells, the Rm values of all twenty-eight
geniculate neurones were calculated from measurements of the membrane time
constants. X cells show higher Rm values than do Y cells. In addition, X cells showed
considerable heterogeneity in their values for RB, whereas values for Rm are rather
constant across the Y cell population.
8. The present results suggest that the cable parameters of geniculate neurones
over-all are not simply correlated to cell size. This is largely due to X cells having
greater and more variable values for RE than do Y cells. Within the Y cell class, the
electrical properties appear to correlate fairly well to cell size, whereas the electrical
parameters of X cells cannot be explained by any simple factor of size scaling. X cell
electrical parameters seem to reflect variations in specific R" and variations in
dendritic geometry.
9. The relatively high values of Rm for X cells serve to reduce their electrotonic
length. This, in turn, may compensate for the relative thinness of X cell dendrites
compared to those of Y cells. Furthermore, the variability in the values of Rm for
X cells may offset variability in the dendritic geometry of these cells, thereby ensuring
uniform values of electrotonic length across the X cell population.
INTRODUCTION

In the cat, the pathway from the retina through laminae A and At of the lateral
geniculate nucleus to the visual cortex is comprised of two parallel, independent
neuronal streams known as the X and Y cell pathways (Stone, Dreher & Leventhal,
1979; Lennie, 1980; Sherman & Spear, 1982; Sherman, 1985). In the context of this
organization, the lateral geniculate nucleus has been generally regarded as a mere
relay whose function is the transfer of visual information from retina to cortex
without significant elaboration of receptive field properties. This idea has stemmed
from the fact that geniculate X and Y cells receive their retinal inputs from one or
a few ganglion cells of the same X or Y cell class and of the same on- or off-centre
receptive field type (Cleland, Dubin & Levick, 1971; Hoffmann, Stone & Sherman,
1972). The receptive field properties of geniculate cells are thus virtually identical
to those of their retinal afferent inputs (Hubel & Wiesel, 1961; Kaplan, Marcus &
So, 1979; So & Shapley, 1981). However, only 10 20 o of the synapses on geniculate
relay cells are retinal in origin (Guillery, 1969a, b; Wilson, Friedlander & Sherman,
1984), and activation of many non-retinal inputs (e.g. from the mid-brain and pons)
dramatically alters the excitability of these cells (Singer, 1973; Foote, Mordes, Colby
& Harrison, 1977; Ahlsen, Lindstr6m & Lo, 1984). It is thus abundantly clear that

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES

655

geniculate cells integrate information from many non-retinal excitatory and
inhibitory inputs, and it has been suggested that the lateral geniculate nucleus may
serve to gate or control the gain of signal transmission from retina to cortex (Singer,
1977; Crick, 1984; Sherman & Koch, 1986).
To understand the integrative performance of geniculate neurones, several anatomical studies have been initiated to study the pattern of afferent inputs to these
cells (Guillery, 1969a, b; Wilson et al. 1984; Hamos, Van Horn, Raczkowski &
Sherman, 1986). However, one must also have a description of their passive electrical
or cable properties, because these parameters play a crucial role in determining
synaptic current flow within a neurone's dendritic tree. The passive cable properties
of dendrites, in conjunction with synaptic location, largely determine the amplitude
and duration of post-synaptic potentials recorded at the soma (for reviews, see Rall,
1959b, 1970, 1977; Jack, Noble & Tsien, 1975).
Due largely to technical considerations, studies of neuronal cable properties in the
mammalian central nervous system have focused mostly on in vivo preparations of
the relatively large spinal motoneurones (Nelson & Lux, 1970; Burke & ten
Bruggencate, 1971; lansek & Redman, 1973; Barrett & Crill, 1974; for a review, see
Rall, 1977) or on in vitro preparations, such as brain slices, that may disrupt the
morphological relationships of the neurones under study and severely limit the
opportunity to stimulate these neurones via their natural afferent pathways.
Furthermore, many of these latter studies have been directed at neuronal populations, such as hippocampal cells (Turner & Schwartzkroin, 1980; Brown, Fricke &
Perkel, 1981 a; Durand, Carlen, Gurevich, Ho & Kunov, 1983), for which knowledge
of basic functional roles and/or morphological patterns of identified synaptic inputs
is lacking.
In contrast to this, the cat's lateral geniculate nucleus offers two major advantages
not generally found elsewhere in the mammalian central nervous system for the study
of cable properties. First, as noted above, the functionally distinct X and Y cell classes
coexist in geniculate laminae A and Al. We can thus determine with the same
techniques and preparations the extent to which these two neuronal types possess
different passive electrical properties and, moreover, what contribution the cable
properties might make to the different responses of these X and Y cells. Secondly,
it is of obvious interest to relate the cable properties of these neurones to their
distinctive morphological features. In particular, geniculate X cells possess somatic
and dendritic morphology plus a pattern of synaptic inputs that differ from those
of Y cells (Friedlander et al. 1981; Wilson et al. 1984; Hamos et al. 1986).
Consequently, a biophysical analysis of the cable properties of geniculate neurones
not only provides a more complete description of these cells, but it affords a unique
opportunity to relate these parameters to other well-documented anatomical and
functional features of these cells.
In the present study, we have investigated the passive cable properties of
geniculate neurones from an in vivo preparation of the cat by modelling these
neurones as equivalent cylinders (Rall, 1959a, 1977). In addition, by combining
intracellular recording and labelling of some cells with horseradish peroxidase
(HRP), we have been able to determine both the cable properties of identified X or
Y cells as well as their somatic and dendritic morphological properties.

656

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

Our results indicate that geniculate X and Y cells are electrically quite compact
(i.e. their electrotonic lengths are roughly 1), which implies that even the most distal
innervation on their dendritic arbors may have considerable influence on their
somatic and axonal responses. Furthermore, certain of the cable properties of X cells
differ from those of Y cells. Some of these differences are not simply reflexions of the
smaller anatomical size of X cells relative to that of Y cells, but instead seem to reflect
variability between the physiological classes in terms of their intrinsic membrane
structure.
Portions of these data have been presented in preliminary form elsewhere
(Bloomfield & Sherman, 1984; Bloomfield, Hamos & Sherman, 1985).
METHODS

General preparation
Many of the general methods used during these experiments have been described previously
(Friedlander et al. 1981; Stanford, Friedlander & Sherman, 1983; Sur & Sherman, 1982; Humphrey,
Sur, Uhlrich & Sherman, 1985), and a brief summary follows. We initially anaesthetized normal
adult cats (2-0-3-5 kg) with 4% halothane delivered in a 50/50 mixture of nitrous oxide and oxygen,
cannulated the fentoral vein to allow the infusion of paralytic agents plus supplemental doses of
barbiturate, and performed a tracheotomy to insert an endotracheal tube. We placed the animal
in a stereotaxic device and changed the level of anaesthetic for all subsequent surgery to 1 %
halothane in a 70/30 mixture of nitrous oxide and oxygen. The cat was paralysed with a 5 mg bolus
of gallamine triethiodide followed by a continuous infusion of 3-6 mg gallamine triethiodide/h,
0O7 mg d-tubocurarine/h, and 6 ml 5 % lactated Ringer solution/h. We then artificially respired the
animal and kept its end-tidal carbon dioxide at a level of 4 %. We made small craniotomies and
durotomies to introduce the stimulating and recording electrodes into the brain. These openings
were hydraulically sealed during recording. Following surgery, all wounds and pressure points were
infiltrated at regular intervals with1 % lidocaine. We then discontinued halothane and maintained
the animal for the remaining 24-36 h of the experiment on a 70/30 mixture of nitrous oxide and
oxygen plus sodium pentobarbitone administered at a rate of 1 mg/h for each kilogram of body
weight. Body temperature was maintained at 37 0C with a thermostatically controlled heating
blanket. In addition, heart rate and e.e.g. (electroencephalogram) were monitored throughout the
course of an experiment.

Visual stimulation

Atropine sulphate and phenylephrine were topically applied to the cats' eyes to dilate the pupils
and retract the nictitating membranes. We then fitted the corneas with contact lenses chosen by
retinoscopy to ensure that each retina was focused on the targets used for visual stimulation. We
projected the optic disk of each eye onto a frontal tangent screen by the method of Fernald & Chase
(1971). Neuronal receptive field positions were measured with respect to that of the optic disk and,
in turn, to that of the area centralis (e.g. Sanderson & Sherman, 1971). By using Sanderson's (1971)
maps of the lateral geniculate nucleus, we could confidently match the histological location of each
HRP-labelled neurone with the appropriate receptive field location.
Responses to spatial sine-wave gratings, either sinusoidally or rectilinearly modulated in time,

were used to determine the spatial and temporal summation properties of cells. The gratings were
generated on a cathode ray tube with spatial frequency, temporal frequency, and spatial phase
continuously variable. The gratings had a mean luminance of 40 cd/M2 and a contrast that could
most measures, we employed a contrast of 0-6: Neuronal
responses to the gratings were Fourier analysed in order to assess the linearity of these responses
(Hochstein & Shapley, 1976; Shapley & Lennie, 1985). Cells were considered to sum linearly if their
responses were generated primarily at the fundamental temporal frequency of the stimulus and
showed sinusoidal spatial phase dependency, with practically no modulated response at one spatial
phase (the null position) and a maximal response to a phase angle of 90 deg from the null position.
Cells with non-linear summation displayed significant response components at twice the temporal

be continuously varied up to 0-6; for

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES65
657
frequency of the stimulus, and these doubling responses were essentially independent of the spatial
phase of the stimulus.
Electrophysiological recordings
We fashioned recording electrodes from omega-dot glass tubing (outer diameter of 1 2 mm, inner
diameter of 0 7 mm) on a vertical puller. We filled each pipette with one of three solutions: (1)
4 M-potassium chloride, (2) 4 M-potassium acetate, or (3) 50 HRP (Sigma VI) plus 0-2 M-potassium
chloride in 0 05 M-Tris buffer. We then bevelled each micropipette to a final impedance (measured
at 100 Hz) of 20-60 MQ for electrodes filled with potassium chloride or potassium acetate and
65-110 MCI for electrodes filled with HRP. Recordings were made using a high-impedence amplifier
equipped with a bridge and current injection circuitry. We used a hydraulic microdrive to advance
the electrodes to the lateral geniculate nucleus. All but one of the geniculate cells included in this
paper were recorded in laminae A and Al; the exception was a Y cell located in lamina C.
Bipolar stimulating electrodes were inserted across the optic chiasm to effect orthodromic
activation of geniculate neurones. The latency of activation from the stimulation site was measured
as the time from the stimulus artifact to the foot of the action potential or excitatory post-synaptic
potential. In half of the experiments, an array of four stimulating electrodes was placed in the
cortical grey matter of areas 17 and 18 and pairs were used for bipolar stimulation to elicit
antidromic activation of geniculate cells. Such activation was verified by triggering the cortical
stimulus from a spontaneous orthodromic action potential in the geniculate cell. This ensured that
the orthodromic spike collided with and cancelled the antidromic spike, preventing the latter from
invading the soma.
We studied several response properties of each geniculate neurone prior to biophysical analysis.
These included response latency to electrical stimulation of the optic chiasm (and of cortex for those
animals in which cortical electrodes were used), ocular dominance, receptive field position, centre
size, centre-surround properties, responses to the modulated sine-wave gratings, responses to
standing contrasts, and responses to fast-moving targets. From these responses, we identified
geniculate neurones as X or Y cells (see Stone et al. 1979; Lennie, 1980; Sherman & Spear, 1982;
Sherman, 1985; Shapley & Lennie, 1985).
Approximately one-half of the neurones were identified as X or Y cells during extracellular
recordings. We then slowly advanced the electrode until we observed fluctuations in the recorded
potential. Cells were then impaled either by applying brief (50 ms) positive current pulses of 2-10 nA
through the recording micropipette, by oscillating the amplifier through over-adjustment of the
capacitance compensation circuit, or by physically tapping the micro-electrode holder. Intracellular
impalement was indicated by a large, d.c. drop in recorded potential, the appearance of
post-synaptic potentials, and large, positive action potentials. Immediately after impalement of
a neurone, we quickly re-analysed its response properties to ensure that the impaled cell was the
same one that we studied extracellularly. The remaining half of the cells in our study were impaled
immediately and thus analysed solely during intracellular recording.
For those cells studied with HRP-filled electrodes, physiological analysis was first performed,
and then HRP was ionophoresed into the neurone with 50-100 ms positive current pulses of 3-10 nA
at 5 Hz for 2-20 min. The activity of the neurone was monitored intermittently to ensure that the
electrode was still inside the same cell. Following HRP ionophoresis, we withdrew the electrode
from the brain and repositioned it at least 500 ,tm distant to any other penetration.

Biophysical measurements
We took precautions to minimize artifacts introduced into our data by the recording system,
particularly since biophysical properties were measured with a single-electrode recording paradigm
requiring a bridge circuit. We collected data only from electrodes that, with optimum capacitance
compensation, displayed time-to-peak responses of 300 1as or less to a square-wave current pulse
when measured at the level of the lateral geniculate nucleus; this corresponded to time constants
of 100-250 Its. During several of the experiments we utilized a driven shield to reduce electrode
capacitance to acceptable levels. We also required that each electrode show no sign of rectification
when currents of up to 5 nA were delivered across its tip. As soon as any change in the recording
characteristics of an electrode was detected during a penetration, the recording was immediately
terminated. When electrode characteristics changed appreciably, any data collected after the
electrode was last verified to have behaved stably were discarded.

658

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

We adopted minimum requirements for acceptable intracellular recording. These included a
stable resting membrane potential (Vm) of at least -50 mV (with a mean for the acceptable
neurones of -60 mV), a spike amplitude of at least 30 mV (with a mean of 39 mV), and clear
activation of synaptic potentials by stimulation of the optic chiasm. We used the bridge to balance
or cancel the extracellular resistance (corresponding to the resistance of the electrode and recording
system) and then determined the input resistance (Rn) of each neurone by measuring the voltage
response to depolarizing and hyperpolarizing constant current pulses with amplitudes of 0-25 nA
and durations of 250-500 ms. We also measured current-voltage (I- V) relationships of several
neurones with similar current pulses ranging in amplitude up to 2-0 nA.
We modelled each geniculate neurone as an equivalent cylinder with a lumped somatic impedance
at one end and a closed terminus at the other (Rall, 1959a, 1969, 1977). We determined the
membrane time constant (Tm) of each cell via the method of exponential peeling of the transient
voltage response to a hyperpolarizing constant current step (Rall, 1969). The hyperpolarizing
current steps were 50 ms in duration and 0-25-0-50 nA in amplitude. Voltage responses to each of
these current steps were sampled at a rate of 7 kHz and averaged for 10}-200 trials by computer.
We also analysed four of the cells with current pulses lasting only 0 5 ms (Jack & Redman, 1971;
Jansek & Redman, 1973; Durand et al. 1983). Unfortunately, the rather high current amplitudes
(5-10 nA) required with the 0 5 ms pulses often caused rectification of our electrodes, prompting
us to abandon this technique.
The charging response of a neurone to an injection of constant current is the sum of exponentials
(Rall, 1969):
1-FV

e
Coe- t/To+lt/T+Ce-t/T2+

-

(1)

where V is the initial resting membrane potential, Vf is the final, steady-state resting potential,
the Ci values are coefficients that depend on the initial distribution of membrane polarization and
the point of observation, t is time after start of current injection, To is the membrane time constant,
and the Ti values are the equalizing time constants. The natural logarithm of the voltage was plotted
against time and the resulting curve was then 'peeled' by a computer-driven algorithm to derive
the time constants and coefficients. In practice, only the longest time constant (r0 = Tm) and the
two longest equalizing time constants (T1 and T2) could be clearly resolved.
We used the first two time constants to calculate the electrotonic length of the entire neurone
(Ln), including the soma, from Rall's (1969) formulations:
a- =

[ (To/Tl )-1 2

Ln = 7r/ca.

(2 )
(3)

The ratio of the dendritic-to-somatic conductance (p) was estimated from the relationship
reported by Brown, Perkel, Norris & Peacock (1981 b):

(To! Vf) [(Co/To) + (C/IT)]-1.
(4)
The electrotonic length (L) of the uniform cylinder most equivalent to the dendritic tree may then
be approximated by:
L = 7T[p/(p + l )]/(TO/.-1)2.
(5)
We employed this estimate for L as a starting point to obtain its more accurate value by computer
p

=

iteration of the transcendental equation (Rall, 1969):
p + [a cot (a L) tanh (L)] = 0.
(6)
When a neurone consists of dendrites that can be reduced to equivalent cylinders of equal L (this
criterion is satisfied by geniculate neurones; see Results), Rm can be derived by the equation (Rall,

1977):

Rm = [AnRn tanh(Ln)]/Ln

(7)

where An is the total membrane surface area of the cell's soma and dendrites. Several geniculate
neurones for which we determined Rn and Ln were labelled with HRP, as described above, and
An calculated. For these cells, we could then estimate Rm using eqn. (7). Finally, we could estimate
Cm =Tm/Rm.
Cm from:
(8)

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES

659

Histology
Light microscopy. Cats in which HRP labelling of geniculate neurones was performed were
sacrificed at least 1 h after the final HRP injection with a lethal dose of pentobarbitone. We then
transcardially perfused them with a 2 1 mixture of 1 % paraformaldehyde and 2 % gluteraldehyde
in 0-1 M-phosphate buffer (pH 7 4) followed by a 1 1 rinse of 10 % sucrose in phosphate buffer. The
brain was blocked stereotaxically and placed in 30 % sucrose solution overnight. Serial coronal
sections were cut on a freezing microtome at a thickness of 100 gam. These sections were reacted
with diaminobenzidine, and the reaction was intensified with cobaltous chloride (Adams, 1977).
We reconstructed cells at roughly 1000 x by using a drawing-tube attachment on a light
microscope fitted with a 100 x oil-immersion objective (N.A. 1-32). We measured morphological
features (soma sizes and dendritic diameters) directly under the microscope by using the same optics
with an eyepiece graticule. We assume a resolution of 0-5 4um for these measurements (Friedlander
et al. 1981). Tissue shrinkage was estimated from the histological material of several brains that
had landmark lesions placed in the lateral geniculate nucleus during recording and that were
processed for histology as described above. The average shrinkage was roughly 20 % linearly, and
although variability was seen in these estimates, we corrected our final measures of HRP-labelled
cells for this average shrinkage (see also Discussion).
Electron microscopy. We made some measurements of dendritic diameters from electron microscopic material. This was performed to improve the resolution (to roughly 0 05 ,um) for the thinner,
more distally located dendritic segments. The actual measurements were made from serial
reconstructions of dendritic arbors that were photographed and then printed at a magnification
of 8500 x . These reconstructions are part of another study (Hamos et al. 1986), and details of the
tissue preparation for electron microscopy can be found elsewhere (Wilson et al. 1984).

Statistics
Unless indicated otherwise, statistical analyses were made using the Mann-Whitney U test
(Krauth, 1983).
RESULTS

We obtained data from seventy-four geniculate X and Y cells during the course
of these experiments. Our morphometric analysis was based on measurements from
fifty-four physiologically identified geniculate neurones that were subsequently
labelled with HRP. Plate 1 shows representative examples of HRP-labelled geniculate cells. Of these labelled neurones, thirteen were used for measurements of dendritic
morphology, and the remaining forty-one were used for the determination of An. The
biophysical measurements were from twenty-eight cells whose intracellular records
met the criteria outlined in Methods. Eight of the fifty-four HRP-labelled cells used
for morphological analysis of An were among the twenty-eight studied biophysically.

Assumptions of the equivalent cylinder model
The equivalent cylinder model that we used in the analysis of the passive electrical
properties of geniculate neurones has several underlying assumptions (Rall, 1959b,
1970, 1977). In addition to previously established assumptions basic to axonal
electrotonus (Hodgkin & Rushton, 1946; Davis & Lorente de No, 1947) these
assumptions include: (1) that the internal surface of the somatic membrane is
isopotential, allowing the soma to be represented as a lumped impedance; (2) that
the external resistance is uniform and negligible over the external surface of the entire
neurone; (3) that all electrical properties, including specific membrane and internal
resistance, are constant throughout the cell; (4) that all terminal endings are of the

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN
same form (i.e. sealed, infinite resistance); (5) that the pattern of dendritic branching
conforms to the 'I power rule'; (6) that all terminal branches end at the same total
electrotonic distance from the soma; and (7) that current flows passively within the
dendritic arbor. Detailed expositions ofthe underlying assumptions of the model have
been presented elsewhere (Rall, 1959b, 1970, 1977; Jack et al. 1975; Jansek & Redman,
1973). Although we could not test experimentally most of these underlying
assumptions, we have at least examined partially the validity of the last three as
applied to geniculate neurones. The morphological and electrical constraints of
dendritic branching are considered in the following section, and the requirement of
passive current flow is discussed below under 'Biophysical measurements'.

660

Morphometry
Patterns of dendritic branching. The reduction of a dendritic tree to an equivalent
cylinder requires that, at each dendritic branch point, the sum of diameters of the
daughter dendrites (Dd) taken to the power equals the diameter of the mother
dendrite (Di) taken to the 3 power (Rall, 1959a):
Dm1 = IDdi.
(9)
We tested this relationship at ninety-seven branch points (thirty-nine from Y cells
and fifty-eight from X cells) from ten different HRP-labelled geniculate neurones.
We purposely made measurements from a population of cells that displayed
considerable morphological variability (e.g. Friedlander et al.; 1981) to avoid any
pronounced bias in favour of any one class of cell. One complication of the
measurements was that the dendrites of geniculate neurones, particularly those of
X cells, exhibited numerous swellings and constrictions along a single branch.
Therefore, for each dendritic segment showing such irregularities, an average diameter
was calculated from measurements made each 3-5 #um. Of the ninety-seven branch
points, seventy-six were mostly proximal and thus of large calibre, and we measured
their diameters with the light microscope. To ensure accurate measures at distal
locations, where dendritic diameters approach the resolution of the light microscope,
twenty-one additional branch points were studied by using material reconstructed
from the electron microscope.
Fig. 1 illustrates the data from all ninety-seven branch points, including proximal,
intermediate, and distal locations. It is clear from these data that both X and Y cell
dendritic arbors follow the 'j3 power rule' remarkably well. This pattern of dendritic
branching consequently fits the geometrical requirement for the reduction of these
dendritic arbors to equivalent cylinders. Although the scatter in the data may
indicate intrinsic differences among individual branch points, it may simply reflect
the error in our measurements, particularly for those branches that displayed
considerable variation in diameter.
Electrotonic lengths of terminal branches. An additional constraint must be met
before a dendritic tree can be collapsed into an equivalent cylinder. Namely, all
terminal branches that derive from a single primary dendrite end at the same
electrotonic distance from the soma. We tested this constraint, as far as our methods
allow, on arbors emanating from six primary dendrites, one from each of three X and
three Y cells. Given the assumptions of constant specific membrane and internal

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES

661
resistances (see above), the electrotonic length of an individual dendritic segment is
proportional to 1/A/d, where 1 is the actual length of the segment and d is its diameter.
The electrotonic length along a dendritic path is simply the sum of the electrotonic
lengths of the individual segments traversed. We used this algorithm to calculate the
electrotonic distance to the soma from each terminal ending of a dendritic arbor.
* Xcell
o Ycell

2*0
1 8

1*61-4
1-42_0 1.
0-0r1@0
O*8

0

pes

0

30

00

3-0

4.0
Dm

*

0

0

00

0-2 _

0*6-

0*40.20.0

1.0

2.0

5*O

6*0

7.0

8*O

9*0

(Wm)

Fig. 1. Analysis of the a power rule at ninety-seven dendritic branch points of ten different
HRP-labelled geniculate neurones. The ordinate expresses the 3 power relationship, and
the abscissa reflects the diameter of the mother dendrite (Dm). Measurements of diameters
of proximal dendrites were mostly made with the light microscope, whereas analysis of
distal branch points were made from material reconstructed with the electron microscope
(see text). Dendritic branch points of both X and Y cells satisfy the 2 power rule
remarkably well, exhibiting an average value of 0 99 + 013 for this relationship.

The arbors from these primary dendrites provided between six and sixteen such
terminal endings, with a mean of 10-8. The values of electrotonic distance for each
arbor were normally distributed. To test whether the electrotonic distances of the
terminal branches within a single arbor were equivalent, we compared the variance
of these values with that expected from measurement error alone (Mendenhall &
Scheaffer, 1973). We assumed a measurement error of 05 jsm for diameter and 4 jsm
for length; diameter measurements reflect only the resolution limit of the light
microscope, whereas length measurements also reflect errors in extracting threedimensional information from our histological sections. Using x2 statistics, we found
that the variance in values of terminal electrotonic distances for each arbor was equal
to or less than the measurement error (P < 0-08-015 for all arbors). Consequently,
within the limitations of our histological measures, these data suggest that dendritic
terminals emanating from a single primary dendrite have equally long electrotonic
paths to the soma.
Although geniculate cells often contain primary dendrites that produce arbors of
varying size, data presented in a succeeding section of Results indicate that larger

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN
arbors are associated with thicker dendrites and thus larger space constants. Indeed,
our impression is that all dendritic endings for a single cell related to different primary
dendrites exhibit similar electrotonic distances from the soma. We obtained limited
data to support this impression. For two additional neurones (one X and one Y cell),
measurements of terminal electrotonic distances were made from two dendritic arbors
each. For the X cell, these primary dendrites produced eight and nine terminal
endings, and the mean electrotonic distance between the endings of one primary
dendrite and the soma were not significantly different from those of the other
(P > 01). Likewise, the primary dendrites for the Y cell provided fifteen and thirteen
endings, with no significant difference between the electrotonic distances of these
endings from the soma (P > 041).
These measurements of electrotonic distance between terminal endings and soma,
while limited in scope and subject to error, none the less suggest that dendritic arbors
of a geniculate cell can be reduced to equivalent cylinders of equal L.
Membrane surface area. To determine the Rm of geniculate neurones, it was
necessary to measure the somatic-dendritic membrane surface area (An) of these cells
in addition to their electrical parameters (see eqn. (7)). This required the intracellular
labelling of cells with HRP following the analysis of cable properties. Unfortunately,
a direct measurement of An is a tedious and time-consuming task, requiring estimates
of diameter and length of many segments of the dendritic tree. However, a much
simpler solution to this problem has recently been suggested. In a study of spinal
motoneurones, Ulfhake & Kellerth (1981) and Ulfhake & Cullheim (1981) found a
strong linear relationship between the diameter of the primary dendrite and the total
membrane surface area of all dendritic segments deriving from that dendrite. Burke,
Dum, Fleshman, Glenn, Lev-Tov, O'Donovan & Pinter (1982) subsequently generated an algorithm from these data with which they could calculate the surface area
of any motoneurone's dendritic arbor simply by measuring the diameters of its
primary dendrites.
We adopted a similar strategy in our measurements of An for geniculate neurones.
Fig. 2 shows drawings of single dendritic branches reconstructed from an HRPlabelled X and Y cell, and P1. 1 A and B shows photomicrographs of these branches.
The dendritic branches were divided into individual segments that were represented
as smooth cylinders with uniform diameter (Fig. 2B and D). The diameter and length
of each segment were determined with careful attention paid to the movement of
processes in and out of the plane of section in order to incorporate all three dimensions
into our measurements. From these measurements, we calculated the membrane
surface area of each dendritic segment.
In this fashion, we laboriously determined the membrane surface area of all of the
dendritic arbor related to thirteen primary dendrites. These were selected from a
heterogeneous population of thirteen different cells (seven X and six Y cells) to
minimize any bias in our measurements for any one morphological class. Fig. 3 shows
the relationship between the diameter of the primary dendrite and the total
membrane surface area of all dendritic arbor related to it. Since these values are
highly correlated (r= + 099; P < 0-001), we could fit a line to the points by the
method of least squares. The line's equation, y = 1 68x-0 99, provided an algorithm
for the determination of the membrane surface area (y) of a dendritic arbor from the
662

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES

663

diameter of its primary branch (x). Both X and Y cells follow this linear relationship
with the same algorithm, indicating a common aspect to the architecture of their
dendritic arbors. Interestingly, this algorithm differs from that reported by Burke
et al. (1982) for motoneurones. We could now calculate the dendritic surface areas
Ycell

X cell

C

Soma

25 pm

25jum

B

D

Fig. 2. Reconstructions of all dendritic processes emanating from a single primary dendrite
for a geniculate X and Y cell labelled with HRP; coronal views. A, reconstruction for an
X cell. B, Sholl plot of the same arbor shown in A. The arbor was divided into individual
segments and measurements of both length and diameter were made for each to determine
the total membrane surface area of the arbor. The length of each segment in the Sholl
plot reflects the actual length of the dendritic segment it represents. C, reconstruction for
a Y cell. D, Sholl plot of the arbor illustrated in C; conventions as in B.

of geniculate neurones by simply measuring the diameters of all primary dendrites
and sequentially applying the derived algorithm. Furthermore, this new method
permitted the use of less-well-labelled cells in which only the proximal dendrites were
darkly stained.
To determine An, the somatic membrane surface area must also be calculated. We

664

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN
estimated the somatic membrane surface area by assuming the soma to be spherical
with a diameter equal to the average of its maximum diameters measured in the x,
y and z planes. More elaborate calculations, including a correction for the surface area
occupied by the bases of primary dendrites, were not made since the somatic surface
area accounted for < 10 % of the total An of our sample of cells.
10 0
9"

.19

-

EL

* X cell
0 Y cell

8x
X

,

~~~6~~~~~0
~

,,

~40
E

c

o/

~

4-0
20

12 0

,,

~

,

30
50
2-0
40
Diameter of primary dendrite (;Lm)

60

Fig. 3. Graph illustrating the relationship between the membrane surface area of dendritic
arbors emanating from single primary dendrites, as illustrated in Fig. 2, and the diameter
of the corresponding primary dendrites. Measurements were made from thirteen different
HRP-labelled geniculate cells. The coefficient of correlation for these data is 0-99,
indicating a strong linear relationship. A best fit line was generated for these data using
the method of least squares (dashed line). The equation y = 1 68x-0-99, allowed us to
calculate the membrane surface area (y) of all dendritic processes related to a primary
dendrite from the diameter of the primary dendrite (x).

By these methods, we estimated An for forty-one other geniculate neurones,
including twenty-two HRP-labelled X and nineteen Y cells (Fig. 4A). The An for X
cells ranged from 19 900 to 46200 ju2(with a mean+ S.D. of 32 700 +8300 /Z2)
whereas the values for Y cells were 33300 to 55 200 ,uM2 (44 000 + 6500 ,uM2) . Although
there is overlap in An values between the two classes, on average Y cells are clearly
larger than X cells (P < 0 001).
Fig. 5 illustrates another feature of these membrane surface area measurements.
For each neurone, the surface area of the soma is highly correlated with its total Ana
This is as true of the entire cell population as it is for X and Y cells individually
(r = +n0i87 to 0n92 and Pr<t0n001 for all correlations). This confirms an earlier
conclusion, based on different morphometric measurements, that larger somata of
exteysoldenditdritic arbors (Friedlander et al.
geniculate neurones are related to more
1981; Stanford et al. 1983).
Scaling of dendritic arbors. Fig. 6 illustrates yet another feature of dendritic
branching for these geniculate X and Y cells. A strong relationship exists between

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES
8

V/% X cells

A

D

6

8
0

Ycells

'7

4
%I-

665

2

L
E 0
z

6
An (X 104 1Im2)

Fig. 4. Measurements of the total somatic-dendritic membrane surface areas of geniculate
X and Y cells. A, An for forty-one HRP-labelled geniculate X and Y cells based on
morphological measurements. Although there is clear overlap in the An values for the two
classes, on average Y cells are larger than X cells. B, distribution of An values for
twenty-eight geniculate X and Y cells derived entirely from their passive electrical
properties using eqn. (11) (see text).

60
55

* Xcell
o Ycell

0
0

50
E
0
x
c

0

45
40

35
30
25
20
15

eo
0
*

0

@0

0

0

0

0.

0

0

00
0.
a

0

1

-

2

4
3
2
Soma surface area (x 1i03 Mm2)

---i

5

Fig. 5. Relationship between the total somatic-dendritic membrane surface areas (An) of
geniculate cells and the surface areas of their somata.

the diameter of the primary dendrite and both the total number of branch points
in the resultant arbor (Fig. 6A) as well as the total number of dendritic segments
in that arbor (Fig. 6B). The similarity in the two relationships of Fig. 6A and B is
not surprising inasmuch as each parent dendrite always gave rise to two daughter
dendrites at branch points. These relationships of Fig. 6A and B are statistically
significant (r = +0-91, P < 0001 for all of the neurones; r = +0 74, P < 005 for the

666

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

X cells and r = + 0-95, P < 0-00 1 for the Y cells). Interestingly, these correlations are
stronger for Y cells than for X cells (P > 0-02 on a comparison of correlation
coefficients), which implies that the arbors of Y cells are simply scaled versions of
one another, with larger primary dendrites giving rise to predictably more daughter
branches and higher-order dendritic segments. In contrast, X cells have more
heterogeneity in the geometry of their dendritic arbors than do Y cells. These are
themes to which we shall return repeatedly below.
20

A

18

*
o

Xcell
Ycell

0

16
0
U

14

c

OL
.0

0

12

0

10

0

0 0

.0

E

z

8

0

0

0 0
0

6

en

A4

a)

42

I

-

B
0

38
0

34
C

CD

E

30

0

26

.2

22

z

0

0 0

0

18

0

0

0

.

14

10

I

2

-

3
4
5
6
Diameter of primary dendrite (am)

A

7

Fig. 6. Relationship between the diameter of the primary dendrite and the number of
segments and branch points in the resultant arbor. The data were taken from the thirteen
HRP-labelled dendrites illustrated in Fig. 3. A, scatter plot illustrating the strong

correlation for both X and Y cells between the diameter of the primary dendrite and the
number of branch points in the resultant arbor. B, scatter plot illustrating a similar strong
correlation between the diameter of the primary dendrite and the number of segments
in the resultant arbor.

Biophysical measurements
We studied the passive membrane properties of twenty-eight geniculate neurones
(sixteen X and twelve Y cells) that met our criteria for adequate intracellular
recording (see Methods). Nineteen of these cells were unequivocally identified as relay
neurones based upon the ability to activate them antidromically from visual cortex
or clear visualization of an axon entering the optic radiations following HRP

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES

667

labelling. The remainder had similar response properties, and we assume that most
or all were relay cells, although for these we employed neither antidromic activation
nor HRP labelling. Fig. 7 illustrates an intracellular recording from a geniculate X
cell, exemplary of the quality of recordings obtained during this study. This cell
exhibited a steady resting membrane potential of -67 mV with spike amplitudes of
approximately 60 mV. These recordings were obtained during the presentation of a
counterphased sinusoidal grating. Fig. 7A shows the lack of a modulated response
to a grating placed at the null position, and Fig. 7 B shows the modulated and linear
response of this cell when the same grating was displaced from the null position by
90 deg.

A "I

IIII||11

Ill | 1 11il |li

li

id i II

25 mV

250 ms

Fig. 7. Intracellular recording from a geniculate X cell. These records were obtained during
visual stimulation with a grating sinusoidally modulated in space and time. The grating
was generated on a cathode ray tube; it had an average luminance of 40 cd/M2 and a
maximum contrast of 0-6. A, lack of a modulated response of this neurone to a grating
placed in the null position of the receptive field of this cell. Note the high spontaneous
activity of this cell. B, linear response of this neurone to the same grating when spatially
displaced by a phase angle of 90 deg from the null position.

Current-voltage (I-V) relationships. As noted earlier, a major assumption of the
equivalent cylinder model is that current flow within the dendritic tree is totally
passive. As a partial test of this assumption, we studied the I- V relationships for ten
geniculate neurones (five X and five Y cells), paying particular attention to any
non-linearities indicative of rectification induced by voltage-dependent conductances. Fig. 8 illustrates the I-V curves for an X and a Y cell showing no obvious
non-linearities for a voltage range of + 20 mV from the resting potential. The I-V
curves for the other X and Y cells were quite similar to those illustrated in Fig. 8.
The decrease in Rn (slope of I-V curve) seen during the greatest depolarization
probably reflects activation of voltage-sensitive sodium channels, since action
potentials were usually initiated at or near this level. The Rn values obtained from

668

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

the slope of the I- V relationships of Fig. 8 were 18 MQ for the X cell and 13 MQ for
the Y cell. This is consistent with Rn measurements from other geniculate neurones
(see below). Of course, the data do not rule out absolutely the existence of additional
active conductances in these cells, because non-linear mechanisms of opposite
polarity can conceivably cancel one another and remain undetected in measurements
such as those depicted in Fig. 8. Voltage- and time-dependent conductances have
mV
20

00

0

0

* Cell.
o

0

o

0

Y cell

0

-10

0
0

0

.0
0

,
-1-0

-2-0

.

wD

,

,
1-0

W

, nA
2-0

00

0.
0
0

0

*

-10

0
0
0

0

0

~~~-20

Fig. 8. Current-voltage (I-V) relationships for a geniculate X and Y cell. These data were
obtained using 250 ms duration current pulses delivered through the intracellular
recording electrode. The resting membrane potentials were - 64 mV for the Y cell and

- 62 mV for the X cell. There are no obvious non-linearities in the I- V curves for either
the X or the Y cell, thereby implying that no voltage-dependent conductances were
activated in a range of ± 20 mY from the resting membrane potential of these cells.

been described for mammalian thalamic cells (Jahnsen & Llina's, 1984 a, b; Deschenes,
Paradis, Roy & Steriade, 1984; Roy, Clercq, Steriade & Deschenes, 1984), but the
50 ms duration of most of our current injections is probably too brief to activate many
of these. For instance, the calcium conductance underlying a low-threshold spike
requires a 100-200 ms period of hyperpolarization before it can be de-inactivated
(Jahnsen & Llina's, 1984a, b).

The relatively large voltage range about the resting membrane potential for which
geniculate neurones appeared to behave passively meant that we could easily remain
within these limits during analysis of voltage transients. Furthermore, as described
in Methods, such analysis was carried out on four cells with both 50 ms (long) and
0-5 ms (short) current pulses. Durand et al. (1983) have recently suggested that short
current pulses reduce the possibility of activating time-dependent conductances
(e.g. Ito & Oshima, 1965). Therefore, a comparison between these two protocols
provides a second test for non-linear behaviour of geniculate cells. In each case (two X
and two Y cells), we found no significant difference between the time constants

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES
6

A

669

B

4
2-

IL
10

14

18

22

26

30

8
10
Tm (Ms)

6

4

R" (Ma)

12

14

F D

6F C
4
4-

I0)
E 2

.0
z

I

2-5

1-5

3-5

2-5

Tr (Ms)

4-5

5-5

1 5

1-75

p

8r

X cells

6

Y cells

F

4

2
u

2

1

0-75

1

1 25

1 5

Ln

1 75

2

0-75

1

1 25

2

L

Fig. 9. Distributions of the passive membrane properties of sixteen X cells and twelve Y
cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus. A, frequency histograms of values for input
resistance (Rn). B, frequency histograms of values for membrane time constant (Tm). C,
frequency histograms of values for first equalizing time constant (Tj). D, frequency
histograms of values for dendritic-to-somatic conductance ratio (p). E, frequency histograms of values for the whole neurone electrotonic length (Ln). F, frequency histograms
of values for the electrotonic length (L) of the equivalent cylinder representing only the
dendritic arbor.

670

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

obtained using either long or short pulses, thus providing further evidence for the
passive and linear behaviour of these geniculate cells during our recording conditions.
Input resistance (Rn). Rn of each geniculate neurone was measured using constant
current pulses of +0-25 nA. Fig. 9A shows the distribution of Rn values. These values
were greater for X cells (with a mean+ S.D. of 22-6 + 3-2 MQ) than for Y cells
(I6l0+ 3-6 Mf), with distributions that are significantly different (P < 0-001). This
result is not surprising, given the smaller size of X cells, and does not, by itself, suggest
any differences between X and Y cells with regard to their intrinsic membrane
properties.

Extracel u lar

Intracellular

3 mVK
2 ms

Fig. 10. Transient voltage responses to the onset of a 50 ms duration square-wave current
pulse applied through the recording electrode. The faster response was obtained while the
recording electrode was just extracellular to a geniculate X cell. The slower response was
obtained while the electrode was intracellular to the geniculate X cell. The resting
membrane potential was -59 mV. The amplitude of the current pulses was adjusted to
produce voltage responses of equal amplitude. The response time of the electrode in
extracellular space is clearly faster than it is in the neurone.

Membrane time constant (Tm). Tm of each geniculate neurone was measured from the
voltage transient response to a constant current pulse. Fig. 10 illustrates two voltage
responses to the same 50 ms square-wave current pulse applied through the amplifier
bridge. The faster response was obtained while the electrode was just extracellular
to a geniculate X cell, and the slower one was recorded while the electrode was inside
the same X cell. The response time (i.e. the time needed for the voltage response to
reach a steady, d.c. level) is considerably faster in the extracellular space than it is
inside the cell. In fact, the time constants of our electrodes were typically at least
two orders of magnitude shorter than the Tm values of geniculate neurones and one
order of magnitude shorter than the tr values. Hence, we did not adjust our measures
of neuronal time constants to account for the insignificant contribution of the
electrodes.
The response of an X cell to a 50 ms current step of -05 nA can be seen in
Fig. 11 A. This cell exhibited a stable resting potential of 59 mV, and its action

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES
A

671

B

29

4)

E

CD
0

0
m

0)
0
-J

4.

to = 1 1 73

0

20
Time (ms)

Time (ms)
C

50 um

Fig. 11. Determination of the membrane and equalizing time constants of a geniculate
X cell using the method of exponential peeling. A, computer average of 100 intracellularly
recorded voltage responses to a 50 ms duration current pulse of -0-25 nA. The actual plot
represents the voltage response as a function of time following the onset of the current
pulse. B, same data as in A except the ordinate has been converted to the natural logarithm
of the voltage. The final linear portion of the curve was fitted by a least-squares algorithm
by computer, and this line was extrapolated to time zero. The negative reciprocal of the
slope of this line equals the membrane time constant (Xr = Tm = 1173 ms). Subtraction of
this line from the short latency exponential portion of the curve yields a second curve,
for which the process of fitting a line to its linear portion is repeated. The first equalizing
time constant (rl = 1-79 ms) is derived from the negative reciprocal of the slope of this
second line. Further peeling in this manner leads to derivation of the second equalizing
time constant (T2 = 0 47 ms). In practice, we could never clearly resolve time constants
beyond T2. However, only Tm and were important for our computations (see text). C,
drawing of the HRP-labelled X cell from which the electrical data described in A and B
were obtained; coronal view.
T1

672

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

potentials were 40 mV in amplitude. A plot of the natural logarithm of the voltage
against time (Fig. 11 B) reveals both exponential and linear portions of this function,
thereby indicating a multi-exponential decay. Tm (which equals r0) andT1 andT2 were
determined by sequentially 'peeling' the linear component from the exponential
portion of the curve. This X cell displayed a Tm value of 11 73 ms, r1 of 1P79 and T2
of 0 47 ms. We subsequently ionophoresed HRP into this neurone, and a reconstruction of the labelled cell is illustrated in Fig. 11 C. The cell body was located in
lamina A. Its morphology, including numerous dendritic appendages and a dendritic
arbor oriented mostly at right angles to the borders of lamina A, is typical of that
of X cells (Friedlander et al. 1981). The An for this neurone was 43700 ,%m2, making
it one of the largest X cells in our sample (see Figs. 4 and 5).
A similar analysis for a Y cell is illustrated in Fig. 12. This cell, whose soma was
located in lamina C, had a resting potential of -58 mV and exhibited action
potentials with amplitudes of 32 mV. Its Tm was 9-67 ms, which is slightly shorter
than that measured for the X cell, T1 was 0 95 ms and T2 was 0-20 ms. The cell was
also labelled with HRP and displayed an An of 50400gm2 (Fig. 12C). This cell
exhibited typical Y cell morphology, including fairly straight, smooth dendrites and
a roughly spherical geometry to its dendritic arbor (Friedlander et al. 1981).
As shown in Fig. 9 B, the total population of X cells exhibited longer and somewhat
more variable Tm values than did Y cells (with means ±S.D. for X cells, 10-28 + 1-30,
and for Y cells, 8-15 + 0-81 ms). This difference between X and Y cells is statistically
significant (P < 0-001 for a test of the difference of means; P < 0 05 on an F test for
the difference of variance) and suggests differences between the intrinsic membrane
properties of X and Y cells. Indeed, data to be described below suggest that the
difference in Tm between the two neuronal classes reflects a higher and more variable
Rm for X cells than for Y cells.
Equalizing time con8tant8 (ji). Ti values reflect the time needed to redistribute
current within the neurone so that the membrane can return to a state of isopotentiality. These time constants depend somewhat on the geometry of the cell's
dendritic arbor, and they thus provide some measure of this dendritic geometry. Our
methods routinely can resolve only the first two equalizing time constants, and to
be conservative, we have analysed in detail only the first of these (T1) for X and Y
cells (Fig. 9C). It is interesting that these values for X cells (with a mean+S.D. of
1-48 + 0-40 ms) are longer than for Y cells (0-90 + 0-22 ms). This difference is statistically significant (P < 0-001). There is also more variance in the values for X cells
than for Y cells (P < 0.01 on an F test). We found no evidence that the T1 values
were an epiphenomena of the Tm values because, within each neuronal class, these
values were uncorrelated (r = +0-31, P > 041 for X cells, and r = -0-06, P > 0-1 for
Y cells). Thus the T1 values may be regarded as independent evidence of intrinsic
differences between X and Y cells, perhaps related to the above-mentioned morphological differences in dendritic branching patterns for these cell types.
Dendritic-to-8omatic conductance ratio (p). p was calculated for twenty-eight cells
using the method formulated by Brown et al. (1981 a). The X and Y cells displayed
similar values of p that were not statistically different (Fig. 9D; mean + S.D. for X
cells, 3-89 + 1 00 and for Y cells, 4*34 + 0 70; P > 0 1). The similarity in p between

673

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES
A

B

15

2-7

&

0)
cm

E
Ut

0)
0

0

-j

ro =

9-67

-1 3

0

21
Time (ms)

Time (ms)

C

Axon

50pm

Fig. 12. Determination of the membrane and equalizing time constants for a geniculate
Y cell using the method of exponential peeling; procedure and conventions as in Fig. 11.
A, computer average of 150 intracellularly recorded voltage responses to a -0-25 nA
current pulse of 50 ms duration. B, same data as in A except the ordinate has been
converted to the natural logarithm of the voltage. Exponential peeling of this curve yields
the membrane time constant (Xr0 = rm = 9-67 ms) plus the first and second equalizing time
constants (Tr = 0 95 and T2 = 0-20 ms). C, drawing of the HRP-labelled Y cell from which
the data in A and B were obtained; coronal view.
22

PHY

383

674

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

classes as well as the small variance in these values was surprising in light of the
tremendous variability in soma size and dendritic geometry of geniculate neurones.
Rall (1959b) has shown that p can also be roughly estimated from the relationship:
p = 0-2 (Rm) (Zd2)/As,
(10)
where d is the diameter of each primary dendrite and As is the surface area of the
soma. This equation implies that p is proportional to Rm as well as the ratio of
the size parameters for the primary dendrites (Zd2) and soma (As). As shall be
demonstrated below, X cells are endowed with slightly higher values of Rm than are
Y cells. Thus the fact that the cell classes exhibited similar values of p implies that
the ratio Zd2/AS is smaller for X cells than for Y cells.
60
,,'

* X cell

-o

° Y cell
, 50
E
o

,#o
le

0~
of

x
Sc4Q .
E
Lu

-'

#A

30

+j

"'

~~~~01 oo

.

.

o

.

.

30,

20 ,
20

.
30

40
50
Measured An (X 103 Mm2)

60

Fig. 13. Comparison of morphologically determined and biophysically derived total
membrane surface areas (An) of geniculate X and Y cells. Each of the eight cells
represented in this data was labelled with HRP and biophysically analysed. The abscissa
represents the morphologically determined A., and the ordinate indicates the An values
derived entirely from electrical properties (see text). The dashed line, which has a slope
of 1, is shown for reference only.

Our morphological data support this contention. Data from our reconstructions
of dendritic arbor related to thirteen primary dendrites (see Fig. 6) indicate that Y
cells display, on average, thicker primary dendrites than X cells (4 3 /um for Y cells
versus 3-4 #um for X cells). In addition, measurements from forty-one HRP-labelled
geniculate neurones show that Y cells, on average, maintain more primary dendrites
than do X cells (6-9 for Y cells versus 5.3 for X cells). With our estimates of As, we
conclude that the size ratio Ed2/A. for Y cells is roughly 1 1 times that of X cells,
which closely parallels the X to Y cell ratio of Rm of about 1 2. In essence, these data
indicate that the greater Rm of X cells is roughly compensated by the larger 2di/As
value of the Y cells, resulting in similar values of p for the two functional classes.
Electrotonic length (L). The electrotonic length of the entire neurone (Ln), which
corresponds to that of the equivalent cylinder representing the dendritic arbor and

675
CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES
soma, was calculated from rm and ri (see eqn. (3)). Fig. 9E summarizes the Ln values.
Ln was slightly but significantly greater for X cells than for Y cells (mean + S.D. for
X cells, 1P29 + 0-21, and for Y cells, 1 10 + 0O18; P < 002). Furthermore, the variance
in Ln for X cells was greater than that for Y cells (P < 0001 on an F test). A more
exact value for L of the equivalent cylinder representing only the dendritic arbor was
TABLE 1. Electrical and morphometric parameters of geniculate neurones
MeasEstiured
mated
Cm
An
An
(x 103
(X103
(1tF/
T
TM
RM Rn
cm2)
p
, m2)
L
Class (ms) (Ms) ((Q cm2) (MCI)
#m2))
Ln
43-2
1P10 6-02
1P23
18
9-91 1-32 5338
X
52-4
1X50 1-79
1-90
19
X
9-31 2-49 5015
41P5
1-16 3-01
1P41
20
X
9-71 1-63 5230
42-1
1P23 3-48
21
1-45
X 10-14 1-78 5462
46.2
22
1-24 1P07 4-47
X 12-89 1-74 6943
1P51
37-9
30-8
1P12 3-36
1-33
23
X
8-60 1-31 5697
32-2
24
1P32 1-10 3-17
9-44 1P42 5085
X
1-62
43-7
38-2
24
1-07 2-54
1-33
X 11-73 1-69 6855
27-2
5*03
24
0-94 0-81
9-49 0-78 5112
X
32-7
1-43 1-22 3-54
28
X 10-62 1P82 5720
2-00
21-6
23-3
4-64
1 00 0-86
27
X
8-90 0-82 4442
27-9
1-14 0.99 4-83
28
X 10-38 1P21 5591
33-4
22
1-13 0-96 3-98
X
9-79 1-13 5273
2-48
29-7
39-6
3-97
1-07
1-25
20
X 10-00 1-37 4031
37-6
24
1-07 4 03
1-26
X 11-32 1-57 6097
35-6
1-21
1-04 4-32
27
X 12-35 1-60 6652
1-92
35-1
36-2
1P02 0-88 4-72
16
8-12 0-78 4374
Y
48-2
1-26 3-15
1P50
13
Y
7-02 1P30 3781
39-8
0-88 4-85
14
1 01
Y
7-85 0-74 4228
42-3
1-07 4-11
1-25
15
Y
8-00 1P09 4309
1-93
43-5
45-1
1-04 0 90 4-73
15
Y
9 40 0 93 4880
1-83
50 4
49 7
14
1P04 0-89 4-55
Y
9-67 0-96 5278
7*90 0-61 4255 18 0-91 0-80 5-23 29-8
Y
1P16 3-01 28-3
1-35
23
Y
7-83 1P22 4217
55-2
1P56
46-4
14
1P19 1P02 4-21
Y
8-42 1P06 5394
27-3
5-26
0 79
24
0-91
Y
9-65 0 75 5198
38-8
3-72
12
1P01
1P19
Y
6-04 0-76 3253
38-7
4-57
0 94 0-81
14
Y
7-87 0-65 4239
Totals (mean+ S.D.)
1.90
33-2
36-5
X
10-28 1-48 5534 22-6 1-29 1.09 3-89
+7-3
+8-4 +0-38
+1-30 +0-40 +777 +3-2 +0-21 +0-15 +100
1 81
46-1
39-2
Y
8.15 0-90 4451 16-0 110 0-97 4-34
+7-6 +0-15
+7-3
+0-81 +0-22 +606 +3-6 +0-18 +0-16 +0 70

Vm
(mV)
-55
-52
-62
-69
-54
-62
-61
-59
-54
-67
-65
-56
-55
-55
-67
-54
-64
-60
-62
-63
-69
-58
-74
-60
-53
-56
-69
-51
-60-0

±5_5
-61-6

+6-5

determined by incorporating p into our calculations (see eqns. (5) and (6)). Fig. 9F
shows that, as was the case for values of Ln, a small difference was observed in the
measures of L (mean+S.D. for X cells, 1-09+0-15, and for Y cells, 0-97±+016;
P < 002), with X cells exhibiting more variance than did Y cells on this measure
(P < 0001 on an F test).
Specific membrane resistance (Rm) and capacitance (Cm). Given the assumptions
22-2

676

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

required for the equivalent cylinder model that each neurone is endowed with a
uniform Rm and Cm, Rm can be determined from knowledge of Rn, L and An (see
eqn. (7)). Eight neurones were labelled with HRP after their biophysical properties
were studied so that their An values could be calculated. On average, the X cells
exhibited slightly higher and more variable Rm values than did the Y cells in this
sample (mean +S.D. for X-cells, 5256 + 1108 n cm2, and for Y cells,
4947 +451 Q cm2). However, possibly due to the small data base of four representative cells from each class, these differences between the X and Y cells are not
statistically significant. Cm was then determined for these eight cells using eqn. (3).
Values for Cm for both X and Y cells were quite similar, with the respective means
for X and Y cells of 1-90 and 1P81 ,tF/cm2; the mean+ S.D. of these values for all eight
neurones was 1P86 + 0-29 ,IF/cm2.
We assumed that geniculate neurones exhibit a common lipid basis for their
membranes, which implies that Cm is constant across neurones. Using the derived
average Cm value of 1-86 #tF/cm2, we estimated An for each of the twenty-eight
neurones from which cable properties were determined by substituting eqn. (8) into
eqn. (7):
(11)
An = (TmLn)/[Cm Rn tanh (Ln)].
For each of the eight geniculate neurones that had their cable properties measured
and that were labelled with HRP, An was derived from eqn. (11) and also measured
more directly from histological material. Fig. 13 shows the strong correlation between
these two measures (r = + 0-83; P < 0-01). Fig. 4B shows the distribution of An values
as derived from eqn. (11) for the twenty-eight X and Y cells from which cable
properties were determined. These distributions are reasonably close to those
determined from histological material and illustrated in Fig. 4A (P < 0 1 on
comparisons between histologically and biophysically derived An values for X and
Y cells), although the size differences between X and Y cells of Fig. 4B are no longer
statistically significant. However, Figs. 4 and 13 together support the validity of
modelling neurones as cables to derive structure-function relationships. Finally, the
average Rm value for all twenty-eight cells is 5534+777 Q cm2 for X cells, and
4439 + 609 n cm2 for Y cells.
A summary of all electrical parameters of geniculate X and Y cells is given in
Table 1.

Relationships among electrical parameters
In addition to determining the actual values for the various cable properties of
geniculate neurones, we examined the interrelationships among these parameters. In
particular, we were interested in which parameters were strongly predicted by the
functional X or Y cell class, and which were more closely related to other neuronal
properties.
Relationships with input resistance (Rn). The measurement of Rn can be influenced
by several extrinsic factors. First, injury associated with electrode impalement can
produce current shunts that effectively reduce the observed R. values. Secondly,
these shunts can lead to reduced resting membrane potentials that may, in turn,
activate voltage-dependent conductances, resulting in further reductions in Rn. In

677
CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES
view of this, we examined what influence the resting membrane potential, which
covered a range of 23 mV, had on Rn measurements. Any relationship between Rn
and resting membrane potential could reflect shunting due to impalement injury,
since both parameters would be conjointly reduced. Fig. 14 shows that no such
relationship exists for either X and Y cells (for all cells, r = -0O08; for X cells,
r = +0-28; for Y cells, r = -007; P > 01 for all correlations). Although we found
no evidence of impalement injury, we none the less assume that cells were injured
to some degree, because recent work has uncovered cell damage during even the
highest quality recordings Durand et al. 1983; Gustafsson & Pinter, 1984). However,
we feel that any cell damage during the present study was relatively small and not
biased in favour of X or Y cells.
30

X cell .
Ycello

*

25

*

0

0

o

0

0

*S.

~200
0

C

.

0

0

15

0
0

0

0

0

0

0
0

lo~~~~~

10
-50

.
-54

-58
-62
-66
Resting potential (mV)

-70

-74

Fig. 14. Scatter plot of input resistance (Rn) and resting membrane potential for geniculate
X and Y cells.

Fig. 15 illustrates the relationship between Rn and An as described by eqn. (7). The
series of dashed curves represent lines of equal Rm for the varying values of Ln. The
Ln values represented in the Figure are consistent with those derived in the present
study for geniculate X and Y cells. The triangles represent the eight neurones
described above that had their cable properties measured and were also labelled with
HRP. Fig. 15 shows the slightly larger Rm values exhibited by X cells than by Y
cells. More striking, however, is the tremendous range of Rm values indicated for X
cells, whereas these values for Y cells fall within a narrow band of specific membrane
iso-resistance lines. Given the assumption of a constant Cm across cells and the
relationship described by eqn. (8), the results of Fig. 15 are consistent with the wider
range of Tm values displayed by X cells than by Y cells.
Because of the relatively small range of Rm values for Y cells, variations in Rn
within this class show a simple relationship with cell size (see Fig. 15). This would
be expected if changes in cell size reflected simple scaling rather than a change in the
basic geometry of the dendritic tree. This conclusion is supported by the morphological relationships illustrated in Fig. 6. The variation in Rn of X cells, on the other
hand, shows no simple relationship to either cell size or Rm. This suggests that

678

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

variations in the size of X cells may be associated with structural changes in dendritic
geometry that will influence Rn values. As noted above, X cells exhibited greater
variation than did Y cells both in the relationship between primary dendritic
diameters and dendritic branching patterns (Fig. 6) as well as in the values of r1
(Fig. 90). Both observations suggest a greater degree of structural heterogeneity in
X cell arbors than in those of Y cells.
40

I ";

"=
\
R =7800fcm2

It'
~~~~~~~~~~~~L =0-8

30

L

103ym2
An\(X
S

L~

cc

\

' \

\D%(

=

1

1
-

O~
10 ~ ~ ,10
F
1
R
Ln0=12
=

10
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

An (X 103 JAM2)

Fig. 15. Relationship between the total membrane surface area (An) and input resistance
(Rn) of geniculate neurones. The dashed lines represent families of curves described by
eqn. (11) for selected values of electrotonic length (Ln) and constant specific membrane
resistance (Rm). The data include X and Y cells whose values for An were either measured

histologically or estimated from electrical parameters (see text). A, X cells with
morphologically determined An; *, X cells with An estimated from biophysical parameters; A, Y cells with morphologically determined An; 0, Y cells with An estimated
from biophysical parameters.

Relationships with membrane time constant (Tm). There is no relationship between
Tm and cell size among our sample of geniculate X and Y cells (Fig. 16A). In contrast,
we did find a significant correlation between Tm and neuronal Rn for our entire
population of geniculate X and Y cells (Fig. 16B; r = + 0O65; P < 0 001). However,
this seems to be an epiphenomenon of the above-mentioned fact that Y cells tend
to have smaller values of both variables than do X cells, because no significant
correlation exists between these parameters when X or Y cells are considered alone
(for X cells, r = +0-21 and P > 0 I; for Y cells, r = +0 40 and P > 0 1). This latter
conclusion is consistent with our observation of no clear correlation between Rn and
Rm. Finally, the membrane time constant of geniculate cells bore no relationship with
the resting membrane potential (Fig. 16C; for all cells, r = -0-28; for X cells,
r = -016; for Y cells, r = -0-26; P > 0 1 for all correlations).
Relationships with electrotonic length. The whole neurone (Ln) and dendritic
electrotonic lengths (L) of X and Y cells bore a strong linear relationship with each

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES

679

36 r
A

32 1
;ZE 28
E

No

a

:t

a

° 24 F
x2
I';( 20r

0

i

A
A

A

^A

*

AA

A

16

A
A

0

12

15

a

a

11

12

I

6

10
9
Tm (Ms)

8

7

r

8

* X cell
o Y cell

13

0

1i1

I

a

E
WE

13

0

.

0

9

.

8 o

o
o
00

14

18

0

7

:

0
0

5

10

22
Rf (MI2)

26

30

14 r
C
0
0

11

F

0
0

00
o

E

0

0
0

0

0

0

c
0
0

8

0

o

0

00 0

0

5L
-5CD

a

-54

a

I

a

-66
-58
-62
Resting potential (mV)

a

-70

-74

Fig. 16. Relationships between membrane time constant (tm) and various other
electrical parameters of geniculate X and Y cells. A, scatter plot of relationship between
the membrane surface area (An) and Tm for twenty-eight geniculate X and Y cells. These
data include cells whose values for An were either measured morphologically or estimated
from electrical data. Symbols: *, X cells with A. measured morphologically; A, X cells
with An estimated from electrical data; 0, Y cells with An measured morphologically;
A, Y cells with An estimated from electrical data. B, scatter plot of the relationship
between the input resistance (R.) and rm of geniculate X and Y cells. Key in B applies
to C as well. C, scatter plot of the relationship between the resting membrane potential
and rm of geniculate X and Y cells.

680

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

other (r > + 0-99; P < 0 001). Consequently, all relationships described for L can be
applied to Ln as well.
A cell's electrotonic length depends largely on dendritic geometry and Rm,
particularly since the equivalent cylinder model assumes constant internal and
external resistance. Jack, Miller, Porter & Redman (1971) and Gustafsson & Pinter
(1984) have shown that L is inversely proportional to the square root of rm (or Rm)
as follows:
La (l/Vd) (m), 2
(12)
where I and d represent the length and diameter of the cylinder equivalent to the
dendritic arbor. This inverse trend between rm and L exists for Y cells but not for
1.6

Xcell *

13-

Ycell o

0

0

L

0
0

0~~~~~~
~0

1~~~0

0.71 ~
5

~
7

0

0*
9
Tm (Ms)

11

13

Fig. 17. Relationship between the electrotonic length (L) and membrane time constant
(Tm) of geniculate X and Y cells.

X cells (Fig. 17). There is no significant correlation between these parameters for our
entire population of neurones (r = + 0-05; P > 0 1) or for the X cells (r = -0.03;
P > 0 1), but a significant correlation exists for Y cells (r = - 0-66; P < 0-01). This
relationship suggests that Y cells differ only in size (i.e. they are scaled versions of
one another, since l/Vd remains fairly constant), and that L depends mostly on Tm
and thus on Rm. In contrast, X cells appear to have far greater heterogeneity in their
dendritic geometry (l/V/d of the equivalent cylinder) and exhibit no obvious
relationship between L and Tm (or Rm). Together, these data provide yet further
evidence, based totally on electrical measurements, that X cells are morphologically
more diverse than are Y cells.
DISCUSSION

We measured the passive electrical properties of neurones from an in vivo
preparation of the cat's lateral geniculate nucleus. These cable properties can be
related to the wealth of morphological and physiological data already available for
these neurones, including their classification as X and Y cells. In the following

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES

681

sections, we discuss some implications ofthese findings as well as certain qualifications
necessitated by technical considerations.

Morphometry
Technical considerations. Our morphological measurements were subject to errors
introduced from two sources. First, most observations were made with the light
microscope, which limits the resolution of measurements under ideal conditions to
02-0 3 #um. Our use of thick sections (100 gim) and white light reduces the useful
resolution from this ideal limit, and we estimate our measurement resolution with
the light microscope to be roughly 0-5 #m. Although this limit was not a significant
problem for the measurements of soma diameters and the calibre of the relatively
large proximal dendrites, the diameters of peripheral processes can approach 05 inm.
We thus employed electron microscopy for determination of many diameters below
1-0 jm, but this cannot eliminate all error in our measurements.
A second source of error was tissue shrinkage resulting from histological processing.
As described in Methods, we adjusted all of our measurements for an average
shrinkage of 20 %. However, we found some variation in tissue shrinkage not only
between animals but occasionally between sections of tissue obtained from the same
animal. Many of our labelled geniculate neurones were obtained from experiments
in which an independent assessment of tissue shrinkage was not obtained, because
we were not yet aware of the problem. Consequently, our use of an average 20 %
adjustment for all morphological measurements reduces but does not eliminate errors
due to differential tissue shrinkage.
Dendritic branching. An important conclusion from our data is that geniculate X
and Y cells obey the '3 power rule', thereby meeting one geometric precondition
for modelling their dendritic arbors as equivalent cylinders. Although our measurements of dendritic diameters indicate some scatter for this constraint, this scatter
bore no relationship to the diameter or location (i.e. distal versus proximal) of branch
points and thus may simply reflect the above-mentioned errors inherent in our
measures. In any case, the scatter in the relationship was not sufficient to obscure
its obvious presence.
The 3 power rule has been sought for many other neuronal types at a variety of
loci with variable and often controversial results. Some studies of a-motoneurones
of the spinal cord have argued that these neurones obey the power rule (Lux,
Schubert & Kreutzberg, 1970; Brown & Fyffe, 1981; Ulfhake & Kellerth, 1981), while
others deny this (Barrett & Crill, 1974; Egger & Egger, 1982). Brain-stem respiratory
neurones (Kreuter, Richter, Camerer & Senekowitsch, 1977), retinal ganglion cells
(Koch, Poggio & Torre, 1982), neocortical pyramidal cells (Hillman, 1979), and
cerebellar Purkinje cells (Hillman, 1979) all fail to satisfy the 3 power rule, whereas
CAl pyramidal cells (Turner & Schwartzkroin, 1980), hippocampal granule cells
(Durand et al. 1983) and spinocervical tract neurones (Sedivec, Capowski & Mendell,
1985) follow this relationship. Curiously, those dentate granule cells located in the
distal portions of the molecular layer obey the 3 power relationship, while granule
cells located elsewhere do not (Desmond & Levy, 1984).
Since many neuronal cell types in the mammalian central nervous system need not
obey the 3 power rule, one might ask what its functional significance is and why

BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN
geniculate X and Y cells in the cat represent cell types that adhere faithfully to this
682

S. A.

rule. It is certainly not present just to satisfy the needs of experimental models.
Unfortunately, other than Rall's (1959a) original description of the3 power rule
and subsequent references to it, we have found little in the literature that addresses
the functional significance of this constraint (but see Rall, 1964).
Two general possibilities can be considered regarding the significance of the 2
power rule. First, this branching pattern may simply reflect the structural or
hydraulic needs of the dendritic arbor. That is, such a branching pattern may be an
epiphenomenon of growth, or it may reflect the most efficient structure for the
internal transport of various substances. While such explanations that do not relate
primarily to neurone electrotonus cannot be ruled out, they seem unlikely or limited
because so many neurones do not exhibit such a pattern of branching. Secondly, this
branching pattern may represent an important means of controlling electrotonic
signal transmission within a dendritic arbor. C. Koch (personal communication) has
recently used computer simulations to model cells that follow the power rule. His
results indicate that branch points satisfying this relationship exhibit the least
attenuation of electrotonic conduction in both directions, and that any other
branching pattern can maximize such conduction in only one direction. That is,
dendritic branching patterns that obey the 3 power rule not only permit efficient
electrotonic conduction of post-synaptic potentials towards the soma, but they also
permit efficient conduction towards the distal dendrites of currents generated at the
soma and proximal dendrities. As a result, action potentials initiated in the soma or
axon hillock, as well as synaptic potentials generated proximally, can invade the more
distal dendrites and influence the further generation of synaptic potentials there. In
this manner, the state of activity of a cell can regulate synaptic activation. Perhaps
only certain cell types (such as geniculate X and Y cells) are designed with such a
state-dependent gating of synaptic inputs in mind, whereas other neurones are
designed to maintain constant post-synaptic potentials regardless of the cells' levels
of activity.
Membrane surface area. A second interesting morphometric finding was the linear
relationship between the diameter of the primary dendrite and the membrane surface
area of the arbor emanating from that dendrite. The algorithm generated from this
provides a relatively simple and straightforward method for calculating An without
the tedious microscopic measurements previously required. Although we can offer no
obvious functional explanation for such a relationship, either structural or electrical,
it is interesting that analogous relationships have been previously reported for
(Ulfhake & Kellerth, 1981), y-motoneurones (Ulfhake & Cullheim,
ac-motoneurones
and
1981),
spinocervical tract neurones (Sedivec et al. 1985). However, the specific
algorithm differs for each cell type, which apparently reflects differences in their sizes
and in the geometry of their dendritic arbors.

Appropriateness of the equivalent cylinder model
As noted in Results, the equivalent cylinder model of neurones requires a number
of assumptions, many of which are presently not amenable to experimental verification. In particular, we cannot evaluate the assumptions of somatic membrane
isopotentiality or of uniform and negligible resistance in the internal and external

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES
683
media. We can, however, address the other assumptions. One discussed immediately
above that seems valid is the power rule. We also have shown that geniculate
neurones respond in a passive manner under our experimental conditions and that
terminal dendritic branches of a given cell end at roughly equal electrotonic distances.
Uniform specific membrane resistance (Rm). Another assumption of the equivalent
cylinder model is that the neuronal membranes exhibit a uniform Rm. Although we
did not examine this constraint directly, several points warrant discussion. Studies
of spinal motoneurones (Barrett & Crill, 1974; lansek & Redman, 1973; Fleshman,
Segev, Cullheim & Burke, 1983) and hippocampal cells (Durand et al. 1983) suggest
that Rm may be spatially non-uniform, with resistance increasing with distance from
the soma. Barrett & Crill (1974) and Rall (1982) suggested that such non-uniformity
of Rm would result in gross over-estimates of Cm since, as determined from somatic
recordings, estimates of Rm would be low (see eqn. (8)).
Indeed, a number of studies of other neurone types utilizing techniques similar to
those used here have produced Cm values that are much higher than the generally
accepted value of 10 gF/cm2 for biological membranes (Cole, 1968). The Cm values
have been reported to be from 2-1 to 5 2 gF/cm2 for spinal motoneurones (Barrett
& Crill, 1974; Ulfhake & Kellerth, 1984), hippocampal granule cells (Durand et al.
1983), and hippocampal pyramidal cells (Turner & Schwartzkroin, 1980). Our derived
value for Cm of 1 86 ,F/cm2 was also greater than the accepted value 10 ,sF/cm2,
although to a lesser degree than these other studies. While the Cm for geniculate
neuronal membranes may be greater than 1 0 gF/cm2, it seems reasonable to
conclude that our derived values of Rm are underestimates for reasons such as ohmic
shunting of the soma due to injury associated with the electrode penetration (Durand
et at. 1983; Gustafsson & Pinter, 1984) and/or a non-uniform Rm.
Another significant factor that can lower the measured Rm from its true value is
the conductance increase due to synaptic activation. In many neurones, including
geniculate X and Y cells (Wilson et al. 1984), inhibitory synapses, which create
relatively large increases in post-synaptic membrane conductance (Ben-Ari,
Krnjevic, Reiffenstein & Reinhardt, 1981), tend to concentrate more on proximal
than on distal dendritic locations. Thus any maintained level of afferent synaptic
activity throughout a neurone's dendritic arbor is likely to increase ionic conductances (with an associated decrease in effective Rm) and should do so to a greater
degree for proximal than for distal dendritic locations.
Unfortunately, it is not practical with an in vivo preparation such as ours to
measure the effect of synaptic activity on Rm, since it is impossible for us to regulate
this activity. Under our recording conditions, the X and Y cells are almost certainly
under constant synaptic bombardment that will increase membrane conductance in
a non-uniform manner throughout the dendritic arbor. It thus seems plausible that
our derived values of Rm are artifactually low. This must remain an important caveat
to our conclusions based on our derived cable properties of geniculate X and Y cells.
Distribution ofsynaptic inputs. The equivalent cylinder model allows representation
of current injection to dendrites only if the current is injected at dendritic sites that
are of equal electrotonic distance from the soma. Although this constraint may seem
to reflect some ideal case, recent electron microscopic observations for geniculate
neurones indicate that such a synaptic distribution indeed exists. Wilson et al. (1984)

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN
showed that each population of synaptic input to geniculate X and Y cells, deriving
from either retinal, cortical, or inhibitory terminals, innervate each neurone in a
particular dendritic zone; these zones lie at different distances from the soma. More
recently. Hamos et al. (1986) have shown that there is a direct correlation between
actual length and electrotonic length of the dendrites of these cells. Taken together,
these results suggest that each class of input terminates on different dendrites at a
roughly constant electrotonic distance from the soma, but this constant distance
differs among the afferent types. Consistent with this idea, Hamos et al. 1986
also showed that an individual retinal axon can contact each of its post-synaptic
targets in a given geniculate cell at a fixed electrotonic distance from the soma.
Of course, current flow within the dendritic tree will also be affected by factors such
as interactions among the synaptic inputs, voltage-dependent conductances, or
membrane specializations such as spines that are not considered in the model (Dodge,
1979; Koch, 1985). However, the electrical parameters that we have derived for
geniculate neurones using the equivalent cylinder model may be considered reasonable first approximations which will need to be modified as more physiological and
anatomical information is provided for these cells. Indeed, the present data indicate
that geniculate neurones meet many of the constraints posed by the equivalent
cylinder model extraordinarily well.
684

Comparison with other neurones
The cable properties of geniculate X and Y cells derived in the present study are
comparable to those of other neuronal types reported in other studies. The range of
Rn values for geniculate cells (12-28 M() was higher than the range of 05-4 0 Mf1
reported for spinal motoneurones (Barrett & Crill, 1974; Burke et al. 1982; Ulfhake
& Kellerth, 1984), but it is less than the range of 39-60 MQ reported for hippocampal
pyramidal cells (Brown et al. 1981 a), granule cells (Brown et al. 1981 a; Durand et al.
1983), and dorsal root ganglion cells (Brown et al. 1981 b).
Our sample of geniculate neurones exhibited Tm values that ranged from 6-04 to
12-89 ms. This compares to values of 11-19 ms reported for hippocampal pyramidal
cells (Brown et al. 1981 a) and hippocampal granule cells (Brown et al. 1981 a) plus
3-9 ms for spinal motoneurones (Burke & ten Bruggencate, 197 1 ; Ulfhake & Kellerth,
1984) and dorsal root ganglion cells (Brown et al. 1981 b). Geniculate X and Y cells thus
seem to possess Tm values that fall within the reported range of these values for other
neuronal types. As a result, the temporal summation properties of geniculate
neurones appear to be somewhat intermediate among those of other cells in the
central nervous system. Given the relationship defined by eqn. (8), a perusal of the
literature shows that our estimates for Rm for these geniculate cells are comparable
to such values for other neuronal types.
Finally, most neuronal types studied to date, including our sample of geniculate
neurones, exhibit remarkably short electrotonic lengths of 0-9-1-8. These measures
have been made for spinal motoneurones (Nelson & Lux, 1970; Lux et al. 1970; Jack
et al. 197 1 ; Burke & ten Bruggencate, 197 1 ; Barrett & Crill, 1974; Ulfhake & Kellerth,
1984), hippocampal pyramidal and granule cells (Johnson, 1981; Brown et al. 1981 a;
Durand et al. 1983), red nucleus neurones (Tsukahara, Murakami & Hultborn, 1975),

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES

685

and dorsal root ganglion cells (Brown et al. 1981 b). These data indicate that, despite
the immense heterogeneity seen in dendritic geometry for neurones of the central
nervous system, most or all of these neurones maintain remarkably short electrotonic
lengths, L. This property enables synaptic inputs throughout the dendritic arbor of
a cell to influence responses at the soma and axon hillock. A conclusion of relatively
small values for L almost seems tautological, since it seems implausible that neurones
would grow such large dendritic arbors that many of their distally located synaptic
inputs are electrically too distant from the soma to be functionally relevant.
However, it should be realized that the evidence for small L values applies only
to Golgi type I cells (i.e. projection neurones), whose axons represent the sole output
of these cells. This may not apply to Golgi type II cells (i.e. interneurones). Recent
studies of amacrine cells of the vertebrate retina, which are interneurones with both
presynaptic and post-synaptic contacts on their dendrites, indicate that these
dendrites cover several electrotonic lengths (Ellias & Stevens, 1980; Miller &
Bloomfield, 1983). Consequently, synaptic potentials may be effectively isolated from
the soma and neighbouring branches, suggesting that individual dendrites constitute
functional subunits. A morphological study of an interneurone of the cat's lateral
geniculate nucleus also suggests such isolation of many of the cell's synaptic inputs
(Hamos, Van Horn, Raczkowski, Uhlrich & Sherman, 1985).

Comparison of X and Y cell electrotonus
X and Y cells clearly differ in several of their passive cable properties, although
these differences are not large in absolute terms. By examining the relationships
between these parameters and neuronal morphology, we can determine which cable
properties are likely to reflect size differences between X and Y cells and which require
more sophisticated explanations.
Membrane time constant (Tm) and specific membrane resistance (Rm). We assume that
X and Y cells do not differ in terms of Cm, and our limited derivations of Cm support
this assertion. Thus differences between X and Y cells in terms of their average Tm
values simply reflect differences in Rm. Rm (and thus Tm) values were both higher and
more variable for X than for Y cells. We cannot as yet determine whether this reflects
an intrinsic difference between X and Y cells in terms of the make-up of their neuronal
membranes or a difference in their synaptic inputs, which, as noted above, can alter
ionic conductances and thus the observed values of Rm.
Indeed, differences between the pattern of synaptic inputs to X and Y cells may
account for differences in their values of Rm. Nearly all synaptic inputs to Y cells
terminate on dendritic shafts, whereas many retinal and inhibitory inputs to X cells
terminate on dendritic appendages or spines (Wilson et al. 1984). Koch (1985) has
demonstrated through computer modelling that the synaptic conductance changes
for many of these inputs to X cell spines will be relatively isolated from the soma,
whereas active synapses on Y cells will strongly influence the soma. Our recording
electrodes inside somata would thus measure cable properties that might be less
influenced by synaptic activity in X cells than in Y cells, with the result being that
the observed Rm values would be higher for X cells than for Y cells.
We were struck by the considerable variability in Rm values of X cells. One simple
explanation for this finding is that X cells exhibit heterogeneity in their intrinsic

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN
membrane structure; this, in turn, may be related to the variability in X cell dendritic
morphology (Friedlander et al. 1981; Weller & Humphrey, 1985). However, an
alternative explanation is that the on-going synaptic activation of X cells, which will
reduce membrane resistivity, is variable among individual cells. Several pieces of
evidence support this latter contention. First, recent examinations of the microcircuitry of geniculate neurones have shown that X cells vary considerably in the
amounts of inhibitory innervation they receive (Wilson et al. 1984; Hamos et al.
1986). Secondly, geniculate X cells have recently been subtyped as 'normal' and
'lagged' (Mastronarde, 1983; Humphrey & Weller, 1985). The distinguishing feature
of these subtypes is the powerful, short-latency inhibition seen in lagged X cell
responses. In addition, X cells have been described with intermediate amounts of
inhibition. Thus, both physiological and morphological evidence suggest that X cells
receive inhibitory innervation of great variability, and this could result in the variable
Rm values we have measured. Although it is possible to explain much of the difference
in Tm and Rm observed between geniculate X and Y cells without invoking intrinsic
membrane differences, this does not rule out their existence. Regardless of their
aetiology, these differences in observed Rm (and Tm) represent important functional
differences between X and Y cells that affect how these neurones integrate synaptic
information.
Electrotonic length. The short electrotonic lengths of about 1-0 for both X and Y
cells indicate that these geniculate neurones are electrically compact. One can
appreciate this compactness by calculating the voltage attenuation factor (H) for a
uniform cylinder of electrotonic length L from the formula (Jack et al. 1975):
686

H=

VO/ VL= cosh (L),

(13)

where V0 is the potential at the site of current injection, and VL is the potential at
the opposite end of the equivalent cylinder. Using our derived average values of L
for geniculate cells, we calculate a value for H of 1-65 for X cells and 1-51 for Y cells.
In terms of voltage attenuation seen at the soma, these values indicate that synaptic
potentials generated at the most distal dendritic sites will decay by only 34 % in Y
cells and by 39 % in X cells. Therefore, even the most distal excitatory synaptic
innervation, thought to arise from visual cortex (Jones & Powell, 1969; Guillery,
1969a, b; Szentagothai, 1973; Wilson et al. 1984) is likely to have considerable
influence on a neurone's somatic and axonal responses.
Can cable properties be used to distinguish X from Y cells? Although a major goal
of the present study was to characterize the cable properties of geniculate X and Y
cells and to correlate these with other morphological and physiological properties of
these cells, we also wished to determine if these cable parameters can be used as
criteria to identify these neurones as X or Y cells. Such an additional set of identifying
criteria may represent the best or perhaps only means of identifying these cell classes
under certain experimental conditions, such as in vitro preparations of the cat's
lateral geniculate nucleus.
We explored this possibility in the following manner. For each cable parameter,
the value that was half-way between the average value for all X cells and the average
value for all Y cells was arbitrarily chosen as a cut-off point. For each cell, individual

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES
687
values of electrical parameters were then assigned as X-like or Y-like depending on
which side of the cut-off point they fell. This was then compared to the X-Y
classification of the cell based on its receptive field properties and response latency
to optic chiasm stimulation. In this manner, we examined the possibility of using
individual values of Rn, 7m L and p to identify the functional class of a geniculate
neurone. The accuracy rates for individual parameters were 89 % for Rn, 82 % for Tmi
79 % for L, and 68 % for p. By combining the results for the first three parameters,
we could predict the functional class of each of the twenty-eight geniculate cells with
an accuracy of 93 %. Thus, at least in the in vivo preparation, cable properties can
be regarded as useful criteria to identify geniculate neurones as X or Y cells. This
reinforces the validity and appropriateness of identifying geniculate cells within the
X-Y classification scheme.
Functional considerations. The clear differences in many of the membrane properties
between X and Y cells indicate that these parameters vary as a consequence of
physiological class and hence may be related to their unique functional roles.
Furthermore, many of these differences were unrelated to morphological size, since
these differences were present in those X and Y cells that exhibited overlap in their
values of An. It is thus important to consider the influence that this difference in cable
parameters between X and Y cells might have on their individual response properties.
Although many of the differences in membrane properties between X and Y cells
were statistically significant, which serves to underscore the point that the X and
Y cell pathways continue to be elaborated separately central to the retina, the
functional relevance of these differences remains unclear in most cases. For example,
the small difference in values of L between X and Y cells reflects only a 5 % difference
in the attenuation of synaptic potentials as they travel from distal dendritic locations
to the soma. In other words, a 20 mV post-synaptic potential generated at a distal
dendritic site and recorded at the soma would differ by only 1 mV between X and
Y cells. From a functional perspective, then, X and Y cells are much alike in terms
of their electrical compactness.
The X cells exhibited higher Tm values than did the Y cells. This will result in the
generation of synaptic potentials in X cells that will last longer and permit increased
temporal summation compared to the activity in Y cells. However, the extent to
which this small difference of approximately 2 ms between the values of rm of X and
Y cells will contribute to the difference in post-synaptic potentials and temporal
response properties of these cells is unclear.
Finally, differences between X and Y cells with respect to Rn reflect the smaller
An and slightly greater Rm values for X cells. The higher Rn values for X cells than
for Y cells imply that, for equal amounts of synaptic current, the X cells would display
somewhat larger synaptic potentials. It should be realized, however, that our values
for Rn were measured with somatic recording and can thus differ significantly from
the actual Rn at any specific synaptic site (cf. Koch & Poggio, 1983b). In addition,
as pointed out by Koch & Poggio (1983 a), synaptic activation can be thought of as
producing a conductance change rather than an injection of current. As a result,
synaptic sites with high input impedances can be very non-linear as they tend to
saturate in potential, thereby limiting the inflowing current and consequently the
potential change at the soma. Thus the validity of the generalization that the greater

688

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

Rn of X cells will result in greater amplification and efficacy of synaptic potentials
than for Y cells will depend on the electrical and morphological features of individual
synaptic sites.
Perhaps the most important difference we found was the higher Rm values of X
cells than for the Y cells. Indeed, Rm (and Tm) represents the only parameter in our
study that is directly related to intrinsic membrane structure. Furthermore,
differences in Rm between X and Y cells appear to be the basis for differences in their
values for Rn and Tm as well. As noted, it is not clear if these differences in Rm reflect
differences in intrinsic membrane structure, differences in the pattern and activity
of synaptic inputs, or other factors.
Whatever the cause of the Rm differences between X and Y cells, this still presents
functional consequences. One consequence relates to the reduction of a neurone's L
value as a function of its increased Rm. As noted above, X cells exhibit thinner
dendrites than do Y cells. This would tend to produce relatively short space constants
for X cells, thereby placing these cells at a disadvantage in terms of the propagation
of synaptic potentials along the dendrites to the soma. The greater average Rm value
of X cells than of Y cells will result in an increase in their dendritic space constants
and, consequently, a reduction in their L values. Although X cells still display greater
values of L than do Y cells, this difference in L would be correspondingly greater if
X and Y cells exhibited equivalent Rm values.
In addition to RM, the geometry of dendritic branching also has a major influence
on values of L (eqn. (12)). However, although X cells show great heterogeneity in
their dendritic geometry, they show rather constant values of L. We suggest that
values for Rm may vary as a consequence of the branching pattern of X cells in order
to maintain a constant and low value of L across these cells, values that are also
comparable to those of the Y cells. This would explain the tremendous variability
in Rm of X cells as reflecting the comparatively great heterogeneity of X cell dendritic
geometry.
We wish to thank Dr Rosalyn Weller for participating in several of the experiments, Jin-Chang
Cheng for computer programming, Joan Sommermeyer for excellent technical assistance, and Ellen
Friedman for help with statistical analyses. We also thank Drs Wilfred Rall and Christof Koch
for providing comments on the manuscript. This research was supported by USPHS Grants
EY03038 and EY03604.

REFERENCES

ADAMS, J. C. (1977). Technical considerations on the use of horseradish peroxidase as a neuronal
marker. Neuroscience 2, 141-145.
AHLSEN, G., LINDSTR6M, S. & Lo, F.-S. (1984). Inhibition from the brain stem of inhibitory

interneurones of the cat's dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. Journal of Phy8iology 347, 593-609.
BARRETT, J. N. & CRILL, W. E. (1974). Specific membrane properties of cat motoneurones. Journal

of Physiology 239, 301-324.
BEN-ARI, Y., KRNJEVIC, K., REIFFENSTEIN, R. J. & REINHARDT, W. (1981). Inhibitory conductance changes and action of y-aminobutyrate in rat hippocampus. Neuroscience 6, 2445-2463.
BLOOMFIELD, S. A., HAMOS, J. E. & SHERMAN, S. E. (1985). Passive electrical properties of X- and
Y-cells in the cat's lateral geniculate nucleus. Neuroscience Abstracts 11, 232.
BLOOMFIELD, S. A. & SHERMAN, S. M. (1984). Morphometric and electrical properties of neurons
in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. Neuroscience Abstracts 10, 56.

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES

689

BROWN, A. G. & FYFFE, R. E. (1981). Direct observations on the contacts made between Ia afferent
fibres and a-motoneurones in the cat's lumbosacral spinal cord. Journal of Physiology 313,
121-140.
BROWN, T. H., FRICKE, R. A. & PERKEL, D. H. (1981 a). Passive electrical constants in three classes
of hippocampal neurones. Journal of Neurophysiology 46, 812-827.
BROWN, T. H., PERKEL, D. H., NORRIS, J. C. & PEACOCK, J. H. (1981 b). Electrotonic structure and
specific membrane properties of mouse dorsal root ganglion cells. Journal of Neurophysiology 45,
1-15.
BURKE, R. E., DUM, R. P., FLESHMAN, J. W., GLENN, L. L., LEV-Tov, A., O'DONOVAN, M. J. &
PINTER, M. J. (1982). An HRP study of the relation between cell size and motor unit type in
cat ankle extensor motoneurons. Journal of Comparative Neurology 209, 17-28.
BURKE, R. E. & TEN BRUGGENCATE, G. (1971). Electrotonic characteristics of alpha motoneurones
of varying size. Journal of Physiology 212, 1-20.
CLELAND, B. G., DUBIN, M. W. & LEVICK, W. R. (1971). Sustained and transient neurones in the
cat's retina and lateral geniculate nucleus. Journal of Physiology 217, 473-496.
COLE, K. S. (1968). Membranes, Ions and Impulses. Berkeley: University of California Press.
CRICK, R. (1984). The function of the thalamic reticular complex: the searchlight hypothesis.
Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences of the UJ.S.A. 81, 4586-4590.
DAVIS, L. & LORENTE DE No, R. (1947). Contribution to the mathematical theory of electrotonics.
Studies of the Rockefeller Institute of Medical Research 131, 442-496.
DESCHENES, M., PARADIS, M., Roy, J. P. & STERIADE, M. (1984). Electrophysiology of neurons of
lateral thalamic nuclei in cat: resting properties and burst discharges. Journal of Neurophysiology
51, 1196-1219.
DESMOND, N. L. & LEVY, W. B. (1984). Dendritic caliber and 3/2 power relationship of dentate
granule cells. Journal of Comparative Neurology 227, 589-596.
DODGE, F. A. (1979). The nonuniform excitability of central neurons exemplified by a model of the
spinal motoneuron. In The Neurosciences Fourth Study Program, ed. SCHMITT, F. 0. & WORDEN,
F. G., pp. 439-455. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press.
DURAND, D., CARLEN, P. L., GUREVICH, N., Ho, A. & KuNov, H. (1983). Electrotonic parameters
of rat dentate granule cells measured using short current pulses and HRP staining. Journal of
Neurophysiology 50, 1080-1097.
EGGER, M. D. & EGGER, L. D. (1982). Quantitative morphological analysis of spinal motoneurons.
Brain Research 253, 19-30.
ELLIAS, S. A. & STEVENS, J. K. (1980). The dendritic varicosity: a mechanism for electrically
isolating the dendrites of cat retinal amacrine cell? Brain Research 196, 365-372.
FERNALD, R. & CHASE, R. (1971). An improved method for plotting retinal landmarks and focusing
the eyes. Vision Research 11, 95-96.
FLESHMAN, J. W., SEGEV, I., CULLHEIM, S. & BURKE, R. E. (1983). Matching electrophysiological
with morphological measurements in cat spinal a-motoneurone. Neuroscience Abstracts 46, 341.
FOOTE, W. E., MORDES, J. P., COLBY, C. L. & HARRISON, T. A. (1977). Differential effect of
midbrain stimulations on X-sustained and Y-transient neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus
of the cat. Brain Research 127, 153-158.
FRIEDLANDER, M. J., LIN, C.-S., STANFORD, L. R. & SHERMAN, S. M. (1981). Morphology of
functionally identified neurons in lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. Journal of Neurophysiology
46, 80-129.
GUILLERY, R. W. (1969a). The organization of synaptic interconnections in the laminae of the
dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. Zeitschrift fur Zellforschung und mikroskopische
Anatomie 96, 1-38.
GUILLERY, R. W. (1969b). A quantitative study of synaptic interconnections in the dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus of the cat. Journal of Comparative Neurology 96, 39-48.
GUSTAFSSON, B. & PINTER, M. J. (1984). Relations among passive electrical properties of lumbar
a-motoneurones of the cat. Journal of Physiology 356, 401-431.
HAMOS, J. E., VAN HORN, S. C., RACZKOWSKI, D. & SHERMAN, S. M. (1986). Synaptic circuits
involving an individual retinogeniculate axon in the cat. Journal of Comparative Neurology (in
the Press).
HAMOS, J. E., VAN HORN, S. G., RACZKOWSKI, D., ULHRICH, D. J. & SHERMAN, S. M. (1985).
Synaptic connectivity of a local circuit neurone in lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. Nature
317, 618-621.

690

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

HILLMAN, D. E. (1979). Neuronal shape parameters and substructures as a basis of neuronal form.
In The Neurosciences: Fourth Study Program, ed. SCHMITT, F. 0. & WORDEN, F. G., pp. 477-498.
Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press.
HOCHSTEIN, S. & SHAPLEY, R. M. (1976). Quantitative analysis of retinal ganglion cell classifications. Journal of Physiology 262, 265-284.
HODGKIN, A. L. & RUSHTON, W. A. H. (1946). The electrical constants of a crustacean nerve fibre.
Proceedings of the Royal Society B 133, 444-479.
HOFFMANN, K.-P., STONE, J. & SHERMAN, S. M. (1972). Relay of receptive-field properties in dorsal
lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. Journal of Neurophysiology 35, 518-531.
HUBEL, D. H. & WIESEL, T. N. (1961). Integrative action in the cat's lateral geniculate body.
Journal of Physiology 155, 385-398.
HUMPHREY, A. L., SUR, M., UHLRICH, D. J. & SHERMAN, S. M. (1985). Projection patterns of
individual X- and Y-cell axons from the lateral geniculate nucleus to cortical area 17 in the cat.
Journal of Comparative Neurology 233, 159-189.
HUMPHREY, A. L. & WELLER, R. E. (1985). Functional subgroups among X-cells in the lateral
geniculate nucleus of the cat. Neuroscience Abstracts 11, 318.
JANSEK, R. & REDMAN, S. J. (1973). An analysis of the cable properties of spinal motoneurones
using a brief intracellular current pulse. Journal of Physiology 234, 613-636.
ITO, M. & OSHIMA, T. (1965). Electrical behaviour of the motoneurone membrane during
intracellularly applied current steps. Journal of Physiology 180, 607-635.
JACK, J. J. B., MILLER, S., PORTER, R. & REDMAN, S. J. (1971). The time course of minimal
excitatory post-synaptic potentials evoked in spinal motoneurones by group Ia afferent fibres.
Journal of Physiology 215, 353-380.
JACK, J. J. B., NOBLE, D. G. & TSIEN, R. W. (1975). Electrical Current Flow in Excitable Cells,
pp. 131-224. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
JACK, J. J. B. & REDMAN, S. J. (1971). An electrical description of the motoneurone, and its
application to the analysis of synaptic potentials. Journal of Physiology 215, 321-352.
JAHNSEN, H. & LLINkS, R. (1984 a). Electrophysiological properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurones:
an in vitro study. Journal of Physiology 349, 205-226.
JAHNSEN, H. & LLINkS, R. (1984b). Ionic basis for the electroresponsiveness and oscillatory
properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurones in vitro. Journal of Physiology 349, 227-247.
JOHNSON, D. (1981). Passive cable properties of hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons. Cellular
Molecular Neurobiology 1, 41-55.
JONES, E. G. & POWELL, T. P. S. (1969). An electron microscopic study of the mode of termination
cortico-thalamic fibers within the sensory relay nucleii of the thalamus. Proceedings of the Royal
Society B 172, 173-185.
KAPLAN, E. S., MARCUS, S. & So, Y.-T. (1979). Effects of dark adaptation on spatial and temporal
properties of receptive fields in cat lateral geniculate nucleus. Journal of Physiology 294, 561-580.
KOCH, C. (1985). Understanding the intrinsic circuitry of the cat's LGN: electrical properties of
the spine-triad arrangement. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 225, 365-390.
KOCH, C. & PoGGIo, T. (1983a). Electrical properties of dendritic spines. Trends in Neurosciences
6, 80-83.
KOCH, C. & PoGGIo, T. (1983 b). A theoretical analysis of electrical properties of spines. Proceedings
of the Royal Society B 218, 455-477.
KOCH, C., POGIO, T. & TORRE, V. (1982). Retinal ganglion cells: a functional interpretation of
dendritic morphology. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 298, 227-264.
KRAUTH, J. (1983). The interpretation of significance tests for independent and dependent samples.
Journal of Neuroscience Methods 9, 269-281.
KREUTER, F., RICHTER, D. W., CAMERER, H. & SENEKOWITSCH, R. (1977). Morphological and
electrical description of medullary respiratory neurons of the cat. Pfliigers Archiv 372, 7-16.
LENNIE, P. (1980). Parallel visual pathways. Vision Research 20, 561-594.
LUX, H. D., SCHUBERT, P. & KREUTZBERG, G. W. (1970). Direct matching of morphological and
electrophysiological data in cat spinal motoneurones. In Excitatory Synaptic Mechanisms, ed.
ANDERSEN, P. & JANSEN, J. K. S., pp. 189-198. Oslo: Universitets Forlaget.
MASTRONARDE, D. (1983). Subtypes of X relay cells in the cat LGN can be distinguished solely by
responses to visual stimuli. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science 24, supply , 265.
MENDENHALL, W. & SCHEAFFER, R. L. (1973). Mathematical Statistics with Applications,
pp. 348-351. North Scituate: Duxbury Press.

CABLE PROPERTIES OF GENICULATE NEURONES

691

MILLER, R. F. & BLOOMFIELD, S. A. (1983). Electroanatomy of a unique amacrine cell in the rabbit
retina. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A. 80, 3069-3073.
NELSON, P. G. & Lux, H. D. (1970). Some electrical measurements of motoneuron parameters.
Biophysical Journal 10, 55-73.
RALL, W. (1959a). Branching dendritic trees and motoneuron membrane resistivity. Experimental
Neurology 1, 491-527.
RALL, W. (1959b). Dendritic current distribution and whole neuron properties. In Research Report
NM 01 05 00.01.02, vol. 17, pp. 479-526. Bethesda: Naval Medical Research Institute.
RALL, W. (1964). Theoretical significance of dendritic trees for neuronal input-output relations. In
Neural Theory and Modeling, ed. REIS, R., pp. 73-97. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
RALL, W. (1969). Time constants and electrotonic length of membrane cylinders and neurons.
Biophysical Journal 9, 1483- 1508.
RALL, W. (1970). Cable properties of dendrites and effects of synaptic location. In Excitatory
Synaptic Mechanisms., ed. ANDERSON, P. & JANSEN, J. K. S., pp. 175-187. Oslo: Universitets
Forlaget.
RALL, W. (1977). Core conductor theory and cable properties of neurons. In Handbook of Physiology,
section 1; The Nervous System, vol. 1: Cellular Biology of Neurons, ed. KANDEL, E. R. & GEIGER,
S., pp. 39-97. Bethesda: American Physiological Society.
RALL, W. (1982). Theoretical models which increase Rm with dendritic distance help fit lower values
of Cm. Neuroscience Abstracts 8, 414.
Roy, J. P., CLERCQ, M., STERIADE, M. & DESCHENES, M. (1984). Electrophysiology of neurons of
lateral thalamic nuclei in cat: mechanisms of long-lasting hyperpolarizations. Journal of
Neurophysiology 51, 1220-1235.
SANDERSON, K. J. (1971). The projection of the visual field to the lateral geniculate and medial
interlaminar nuclei in the cat. Journal of Comparative Neurology 143, 101-118.
SANDERSON, K. J. & SHERMAN, S. M. (1971). Naso-temporal overlap in visual field projected to
lateral geniculate nucleus in the cat. Journal of Neurophysiology 34, 453-466.
SEDIVEC, M. J., CAPOWSKI, J. J. & MENDELL, L. M. (1985). Morphology of HRP-injected spinocervical tract neurons: effect of dorsal rhizotomy. Journal of Neuroscience 6, 661-672.
SHAPLEY, R. & LENNIE, P. (1985). Spatial frequency analysis in the visual system. Annual Review
of Neuroscience 8, 547-583.
SHERMAN, S. M. (1985). Functional organization of the W-, X- and Y-cell pathways in the cat: a
review and hypothesis. In Progress in Psychobiology and Physiological Psychology, vol. 11, ed.
SPRAGUE, J. M. & EPSTEIN, A. N., pp. 233-314. New York: Academic Press.
SHERMAN, S. M. & KOCH, C. (1986). The control of retinogeniculate transmission in the mammalian
lateral geniculate nucleus. Experimental Brain Research 63, 1-20.
SHERMAN, S. M. & SPEAR, P. D. (1982). Organization of visual pathways in normal and visually
deprived cats. Physiological Reviews 62, 738-855.
SINGER, W. (1973). The effect of mesencephalic reticular stimulation on intracellular potentials of
cat lateral geniculate neurons. Brain Research 61, 35-54.
SINGER, W. (1977). Control of thalamic transmission by corticofugal and ascending reticular
pathways in the visual system. Physiological Reviews 57, 386-420.
So, Y.-T. & SHAPLEY, R. (1981). Spatial tuning of cells in and around lateral geniculate nucleus
of the cat: X and Y relay cells and perigeniculate interneurons. Journal of Neurophysiology 45,
107-120.
STANFORD, L. R., FRIEDLANDER, M. J. & SHERMAN, S. M. (1983). Morphological and physiological
properties of geniculate W-cells of the cat: a comparison with X- and Y-cells. Journal of
Neurophysiology 50, 582-608.
STONE, J., DREHER, B. & LEVENTHAL, A. (1979). Hierarchical and parallel mechanisms in the
organization of visual cortex. Brain Research Reviews 1, 345-394.
SUR, M. & SHERMAN, S. M. (1982). Retinogeniculate terminations in cats: morphological differences
between X- and Y-cell axons. Science 218, 389-391.
SZENTA~GOTHAI, J. (1973). Neuronal and synaptic architecture of the lateral geniculate nucleus. In
Handbook of Sensory Physiology, vol. VII/3, Central Processing of Visual Information, part B,
Visual Centers in the Brain, ed. JUNG, R., pp. 141-176. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
TSUKAHARA, N., MURAKAMI, F. & HULTBORN, H. (1975). Electrical constants of neurons of the red
nucleus. Experimental Brain Research 23, 49-64.

692

S. A. BLOOMFIELD, J. E. HAMOS AND S. M. SHERMAN

TURNER, D. A. & SCHWARTZKROIN, P. A. (1980). Steady-state electrotonic analysis of
intracellularly-stained hippocampal neurons. Journal of Neurophy8iology 44, 184-199.
ULFHAKE, B. & CULLHEIM, S. (1981). A quantitative light microscopic study of the dendrites of cat
spinal y-motoneurons after intracellular staining with horseradish peroxidase. Journal of
Comparative Neurology 202, 585-596.
ULFHAKE, B. & KELLERTH, J.-O. (1981). A quantitative light microscopic study of the dendrites
of cat spinal a-motoneurones after intracellular staining with horseradish peroxidase. Journal
of Comparative Neurology 202, 561-569.
ULFHAKE, B. & KELLERTH, J.-O. (1984). Electrophysiological and morphological measurements in
cat gastrocnemius and soleus a-motoneurones. Brain Research 307, 167-169.
WELLER, R. E. & HUMPHREY, A. L. (1985). Structural correlates of functional subgroups among
X-cells in the cat LGN. Neuroscience Ab8tract8 11, 318.
WILSON, J. R., FRIEDLANDER, M. J. & SHERMAN, S. M. (1984). Fine structural morphology of
identified X- and Y-cells in the cat's lateral geniculate nucelus. Proceedings of the Royal Society
B 221, 411-436.
EXPLANATION OF PLATE

Photomicrographs of HRP-labelled geniculate neurones in 100 jsm thick coronal sections. A,
physiologically characterized X cell that was subsequently labelled with HRP. The arrow points
to the portion of dendritic arbor that is shown in Fig. 2A and B. Calibration bar = 50 jtm and
applies to B as well. B, HRP-labelled geniculate Y cell. The arrow points to the portion of dendritic
arbor that is shown in Fig. 2C and D. C, HRP-labelled geniculate X cell that was analysed
biophysically and shown in Fig. 11. Calibration bar = 15 ,sm.

The Journal of Physiology, Vol. 383

e ...

Plate 1

e

:\eW

N
(3

I

BLOOMFIELD, HAMOS AND SHERMAN(

(Facing p. 692)

