Anatomic, Intrinsic, and Synaptic Properties of Dorsal and Ventral
Division Neurons in Rat Medial Geniculate Body
EDWARD L. BARTLETT AND PHILIP H. SMITH
Department of Anatomy and The Neuroscience Training Program, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706-1532
Bartlett, Edward L. and Philip H. Smith. Anatomic, intrinsic, and
synaptic properties of dorsal and ventral division neurons in rat medial
geniculate body. J. Neurophysiol. 81: 1999 –2016, 1999. Presently
little is known about what basic synaptic and cellular mechanisms are
employed by thalamocortical neurons in the two main divisions of the
auditory thalamus to elicit their distinct responses to sound. Using
intracellular recording and labeling methods, we characterized anatomic features, membrane properties, and synaptic inputs of thalamocortical neurons in the dorsal (MGD) and ventral (MGV) divisions in
brain slices of rat medial geniculate body. Quantitative analysis of
dendritic morphology demonstrated that tufted neurons in both divisions had shorter dendrites, smaller dendritic tree areas, more profuse
branching, and a greater dendritic polarization compared with stellate
neurons, which were only found in MGD. Tufted neuron dendritic
polarization was not as strong or consistent as earlier Golgi studies
suggested. MGV and MGD cells had similar intrinsic properties
except for an increased prevalence of a depolarizing sag potential in
MGV neurons. The sag was the only intrinsic property correlated with
cell morphology, seen only in tufted neurons in either division. Many
MGV and MGD neurons received excitatory and inhibitory inferior
colliculus (IC) inputs (designated IN/EX or EX/IN depending on
excitation/inhibition sequence). However, a significant number only
received excitatory inputs (EX/O) and a few only inhibitory (IN/O).
Both MGV and MGD cells displayed similar proportions of response
combinations, but suprathreshold EX/O responses only were observed
in tufted neurons. Excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials
(EPSPs and IPSPs) had multiple distinguishable amplitude levels
implying convergence. Excitatory inputs activated ␣-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and N-methyl-Daspartate (NMDA) receptors the relative contributions of which were
variable. For IN/EX cells with suprathreshold inputs, first-spike timing was independent of membrane potential unlike that of EX/O cells.
Stimulation of corticothalamic (CT) and thalamic reticular nucleus
(TRN) axons evoked a GABAA IPSP, EPSP, GABAB IPSP sequence
in most neurons with both morphologies in both divisions. TRN IPSPs
and CT EPSPs were graded in amplitude, again suggesting convergence. CT inputs activated AMPA and NMDA receptors. The NMDA
component of both IC and CT inputs had an unusual voltage dependence with a detectable DL-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid-sensitive component even below Ϫ70 mV. First-spike latencies of CT
evoked action potentials were sensitive to membrane potential regardless of whether the TRN IPSP was present. Overall, our in vitro data
indicate that reported regional differences in the in vivo responses of
MGV and MGD cells to auditory stimuli are not well correlated with
major differences in intrinsic membrane features or synaptic responses between cell types.

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment
of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked ‘‘advertisement’’
in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

INTRODUCTION

A set of auditory thalamic nuclei, known collectively as the
medial geniculate body (MGB), receives, modifies, and transfers sensory information largely to specific regions of the
cortex. In the two major MGB subdivisions, the ventral or
lemniscal (MGV) and the dorsal or extralemniscal (MGD)
divisions, cells often respond differently to acoustic stimuli
(see Clarey et al. 1992 for a recent review). Extracellular
recordings, made primarily in anesthetized cat but also from
rodent and monkey, indicate that MGV thalamocortical neurons are arranged tonotopically, with many showing narrow
frequency tuning and a consistent short-latency response to
repeated sounds. MGD neurons, in contrast, are not tonotopically arranged and can display broad frequency tuning, more
variable response latencies, and rapid habituation to repeated
sounds (Aitkin and Webster 1971, 1972; Allon et al. 1981;
Bordi and Ledoux 1994; Calford 1983; Calford and Webster
1981; Imig and Morel 1985). Currently it is not known how
factors like membrane properties, dendritic architecture, or
synaptic input features contribute to these distinct response
differences. Moreover because some cells in one division may
respond differently to auditory stimuli when compared with
others in that same division (Aitkin and Webster 1971; Bordi
and Ledoux 1994), it is not known whether these factors can be
correlated with a particular response type.
Besides differing in response features, MGB neurons also
differ morphologically. Cat and rat Golgi studies indicate that
two main classes of thalamocortical neurons can be distinguished qualitatively in the two major subdivisions (Clerici and
Coleman 1990; Clerici et al. 1990; Morest 1964, 1965a,b;
Winer 1984). In MGV, ‘‘tufted’’ neurons have bushy secondary dendrites that result from lower-order dendrites giving rise
to numerous branches in close proximity. In cat and rat, these
cells are reported to have a restricted or ‘‘bitufted’’ domain
polarized along the long axis of the cell body and parallel to the
ascending fibers of the brachium of the inferior colliculus (IC).
In the MGD, many neurons have ‘‘stellate’’ morphology due to
radially extending, lower-order dendrites typically generating
two higher-order dendrites that diverge to form a star-like
configuration (Clerici and Coleman 1990; Clerici et al. 1990;
Morest 1964, 1965b; Winer and Morest 1983, 1984). Some
MGD neurons can have tufted-like morphology but do not
display oriented dendritic trees (Clerici et al. 1990; Winer
1992).
Except for an early study (Nelson and Erulkar 1963), intracellular response features of MGB neurons in vivo are unavailable, but there are several reports of intracellular recordings in

0022-3077/99 $5.00 Copyright © 1999 The American Physiological Society

1999

2000

E. L. BARTLETT AND P. H. SMITH

slices. The surprising conclusion of the pioneer work of
Jahnsen and Llinas (1984a,b) was that thalamocortical cells,
including four from the MGB, displayed similar electrophysiological features regardless of morphological differences or
thalamic location. This finding indicated that intrinsic membrane features were probably not related to cell to cell response
differences to natural sensory stimuli in vivo. Recent work (Hu
1995; Hu et al. 1994; Senatorov et al. 1997) has challenged this
perception in the auditory thalamus by proposing that rat MGV
and MGD cells may have different intrinsic features that could
influence their in vivo response. A hyperpolarization-activated
cation current (Ih) found in most MGV neurons could produce
a depolarizing ‘‘sag’’ that was not evident in most MGD
neurons (Hu 1995). It was suggested that Ih produced more
depolarized resting potentials in MGV neurons, putting them in
the ‘‘single spike,’’ or tonic, mode. In contrast, MGD neurons
without Ih were more hyperpolarized and in the Ca2ϩ-dependent ‘‘burst mode’’ of thalamic firing (Hu 1995; Hu et al. 1994;
Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a). Given that a single thalamic neurons can switch between firing modes and that synaptic responses of cells in the two firing modes would differ when
presented with the same input, control of resting potential is a
potentially important feature in determining responses to sensory stimuli. However, the cells were selected populations
from restricted regions of the MGV and MGD and only a few
cells were labeled intracellularly (Hu 1995; Hu et al. 1994).
In addition to anatomic and extracellular response differences, the origin of afferent inputs to MGV and MGD cells
differ as well. Most ascending MGV afferents arise from cells
in the laminated, tonotopically organized central nucleus of the
IC (Andersen et al. 1980; Calford and Aitkin 1983; Kudo and
Niimi 1978, 1980; LeDoux et al. 1985; Rouiller and de Ribaupierre 1985). Ascending auditory inputs to MGD arise from
other regions of the IC and the lateral tegmental system (see
Winer 1992) and show no obvious laminar distribution. Recent
evidence in the cat and rat (Peruzzi et al. 1997; St. Marie et al.
1997; Winer et al. 1996) indicates that some collicular inputs to
both regions are GABAergic. The other major afferent inputs
to MGB are excitatory inputs originating from auditory cortex
and GABAergic inputs from the thalamic reticular nucleus
(TRN) (Jones 1975; Jones and Powell 1969a,b; Jones and
Rockel 1971; Montero 1983; Rouiller et al. 1985). TRN cells
are organized topographically and project to both dorsal and
ventral divisions (Crabtree 1998). Cortical inputs to MGB cells
are mainly from layer VI pyramidal cells in primary auditory
cortex (to MGV) or nonprimary auditory cortex (to MGD) the
axons of which give rise to small, excitatory terminals thought
to synapse on distal dendrites (Bajo et al. 1995; Ojima 1994;
Rouiller and Welker 1991). Some evidence exists regarding the
influence of these inputs on extracellular MGB cell responses
in vivo (Ryugo and Weinberger 1976; Yan and Suga 1996;
Zhang et al. 1997), but there are no data on their intracellular
features.
In this study, we sought to clarify the relationship among
cell location, cell morphology, intrinsic properties, and synaptic properties of MGV and MGD neurons. We recorded intracellularly from cells in both divisions of the rat MGB using
brain slices and labeled these physiologically characterized
cells. To correlate the membrane features and synaptic properties with morphology, the morphological type of a number of
neurons was established using more quantitative methods. We

then categorized and compared the basic membrane features of
these different cell types in the two major divisions and compared the influences of ascending and descending synaptic
inputs. Our analysis suggests that, in the rat slice, neurons in
both regions with either cell morphology can have similar
resting potentials, firing modes, proportion of response patterns
to IC input (with one exception), and responses to corticothalamic and thalamic reticular nucleus stimulation. Overall our
results imply that the marked contrast between the in vivo
responses of MGV versus MGD neurons may be due to differences in the afferent response patterns and the selectivity of
each afferent input to auditory stimuli.
METHODS

Intracellular recording
Methods for intracellular recording, stimulation, and labeling of
MGB neurons are described elsewhere (Peruzzi et al. 1997; Smith
1992). All methods were approved by the University of Wisconsin
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Animals were maintained in an American Associations for Accreditation of Laboratory
Animal Care-approved facility. Briefly, 3- to 6-wk-old hooded rats
were anesthetized deeply (chloral hydrate, 70 mg/ml, 1–1.5 ml ip, or
pentobarbital sodium, 10 mg/ml, 0.5 ml ip) and perfused transcardially with chilled, oxygenated sucrose saline (described in the following text). Four-hundred- to 500-␮m slices in the desired plane of
section containing the MGB were then made as described previously
an placed in a holding chamber with oxygenated room temperature
saline (Peruzzi et al. 1997; Smith 1992). After equilibrating, a slice
was transferred to the recording chamber and perfused with oxygenated normal saline at 33–34°C containing the following (in mM): 124
NaCl, 5 KCl, 1.2 KH2PO4, 2.4 CaCl2, 1.3 MgSO4, 26 NaHCO3, and
10 glucose. Sucrose saline contained sucrose instead of NaCl (Aghajanian and Rasmussen 1989). In experiments that assessed the effect
of extracellular [Kϩ] on membrane properties, we used a bathing
solution which contained the following (in mM): 125 NaCl, 1.8 KCl,
1.2 KH2PO4, 1.8 CaCl2, 1 MgSO4, 26 NaHCO3, and 10 glucose. This
saline had a final [Kϩ] similar to that used in previous in vitro MGB
studies (Hu 1995; Hu et al. 1994).
In horizontal and sagittal slices, one stimulating electrode was
positioned in the thalamic radiations (see Paxinos and Watson 1986,
plates 84 and 103) to excite corticothalamic and thalamic reticular
nucleus fibers. The other was placed in the brachium of the inferior
colliculus to excite IC axons (see Peruzzi et al. 1997, Fig. 5).
Bicuculline methiodide, 2-hydroxysaclofen, DL-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (APV), 6,7-dinitroquinoxaline (DNQX), SR-95531
(Research Biochemicals International, Natick, MA), and CGP35348
(Ciba-Geigy, West Caldwell, NJ) were all mixed with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) to the stated concentrations the day of the
experiment and bath applied.
Glass microelectrodes (80 –200 M⍀) filled with 2 M potassium
acetate containing 2% Neurobiotin were used to record intracellularly.
After recording and injection, the slice was removed from the recording chamber and fixed. Neurobiotin-labeled MGB neurons were prepared and reacted as previously described (Peruzzi et al. 1997; Smith
1992). Two-dimensional camera lucida drawings of injected cells
were made at ϫ1,250. Cell body location relative to the MGB divisions was determined using the Paxinos and Watson (1986) atlas and
the cytoarchitectural study of the rat MGB by Clerici and Coleman
(1990).

Data analysis
PHYSIOLOGY. Intracellular current and voltage records were digitized and sampled by a PC using software developed here. The

PROPERTIES OF RAT MEDIAL GENICULATE BODY NEURONS

difference between the voltage measured extracellularly in saline and
intracellularly during recording was taken as the resting membrane
potential. Input resistance was taken as the slope of the linear portion
of the current-voltage plot near the resting potential or calculated from
the maximum voltage deflection to a Ϫ0.1-nA current pulse. The I-V
response was ‘‘rectified’’ if voltage responses to equal-amplitude,
opposite-polarity currents differed by Ն25%. If the maximum voltage
deflection to a 200-to 300-ms hyperpolarizing current differed from
that during the last 25 ms by Ն2 mV, the cell was said to have a
‘‘sag.’’ Cells were in burst mode at rest if depolarization evoked a
large long-lasting depolarizing event often crested by multiple highfrequency action potentials (see Fig. 3B). The burst depolarization
depends on extracellular Ca2ϩ (not shown) and has been seen in MGB
and elsewhere in the thalamus (Hu 1995; Jahnsen and Llinas 1984a,b;
Tennigkeit et al. 1996).
Excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) and short-latency inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) latencies were measured from stimulus artifact onset to where the PSP consistently changed the membrane potential. To dissociate EPSP and IPSP latencies when both
were present, responses were recorded while the cell was polarized
around rest. EPSP latencies were calculated near the IPSP reversal
potential. GABAA IPSP latencies were measured as the time when an
early component of the postsynaptic potential reversed polarity as
membrane potential was changed from a depolarized to hyperpolarized level. Where applicable, first-spike latencies were calculated
from the stimulus artifact onset to the action potential peak.
The number of EPSP amplitude levels was calculated by counting
the number of levels that differed by Ͼ1 mV or that differed by Ͼ10%
of the response amplitude, depending on which was greater, as stimulus intensity was increased from 10 to 150 V in 10-V increments.
Statistical analysis for all results was carried out using Minitab
software (Minitab, State College, PA). Unless otherwise stated, statistical comparisons were performed using the Mann-Whitney test and
the minimum criterion for statistical significance was P Ͻ 0.05.
ANATOMY.
The somas and primary dendrites of labeled neurons
were drawn at ϫ1,250, and soma areas were calculated using Neurolucida software (Microbrightfield, Colchester, VT). Only well-labeled somas with no signs of electrode induced deformation were
used. Dendritic arbor area was measured using the same software by
drawing a line between the ends of adjacent dendrites to create an area
enclosing the entire dendritic tree, then measuring the enclosed area.
Dendritic projection distance from the soma was calculated by measuring the length of the dendrite from the soma. Scaled circles
representing 50 or 100 ␮m were used to count the number of dendrites
extending beyond 50 or 100 ␮m, and the sum was termed the number
of ‘‘dendritic intersections’’ at these radii. Each circle was centered
around the soma center and divided into eight 45° sectors, and the
number of dendrites intersecting each sector at 50 and 100 ␮m was
TABLE

1.

2001

counted. Also the number of sectors (directions) with one or more
dendrites intersecting at 50 and 100 ␮m was counted. To estimate
directional uniformity of dendritic projections, we devised a simple
measurement termed the orientation ratio. This ratio is the sum of the
number of dendritic intersections in the four sectors with the most
intersections divided by the sum of the number in the four sectors with
the fewest. If the sum of the four sectors with the fewest intersections
totaled zero, it was set to one to avoid dividing by zero. A dendritic
tree with similar numbers of dendrites projecting in each direction
would have an orientation ratio close to one, whereas a tree with
dendrites preferentially projecting in a small number of directions
would have a large orientation ratio.
Analysis of the fully reconstructed dendritic trees of 23 neurons at
ϫ1,250 demonstrated that stellate neurons had significantly longer
dendrites than tufted neurons (Table 1, stellate range: 179 –231 ␮m,
tufted range: 123–176 ␮m). An additional 30 neurons were drawn at
a lower magnification, and their dendritic lengths were measured.
Those whose three longest dendrites averaged Ͻ 160 ␮m were called
tufted and those that averaged Ͼ 175 ␮m were called stellate. A few
of these neurons whose dendrites averaged between 160 and 175 ␮m
could not be classified solely by dendritic length.
RESULTS

The database for this study consists of 106 MGB neurons
that were recorded intracellularly. Certain aspects of some of
the neurons have been considered in a previous study (Peruzzi
et al. 1997).
Qualitative descriptions of MGV and MGD neurons
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate several examples of labeled
thalamocortical cells from each MGB division. Cell somas had
no consistent shape or size, regardless of MGB subdivision,
plane of section, or dendritic tree appearance. The axon arose
from the cell body or proximally from a primary dendrite (Figs.
1 and 2, 1). No axon collaterals ever were observed within
the MGB.
In the ventral division, dendritic trees were fairly dense and
intertwined, resembling previous descriptions of dendritic tufts
(Clerici et al. 1990; Winer 1992). MGV neurons sometimes
displayed an oriented dendritic tree. For example, cells 1, 2, 6,
and 7 in Fig. 1 demonstrate fairly clear orientation in the
horizontal (cells 1, 6, and 7) and sagittal (cell 2) planes. Other
cells, including cells drawn in the coronal (cells 5 and 8) and
horizontal planes (cell 3), did not display clear dendritic ori-

Morphological comparison of MGV and MGD neurons

Dendritic tree area, ␮m2
Soma area, ␮m2
Dendrite length, ␮m
Number of intersections Ͼ50 ␮m
Number of intersections Ͼ100 ␮m
Number of directions Ͼ50 ␮m
Number of directions Ͼ100 ␮m
Orientation ratio at 100 ␮m

MGV 7H, 2S, 1C
10

MGD 12H, 1C
13

Tufted Ͻ40,000
12

Stellate Ͼ40,000
6

28,600 Ϯ 5,900
190.2 Ϯ 45.0 (19)
133.0 Ϯ 8.6b (9)
42.0 Ϯ 8.8d
19.7 Ϯ 10.6
7.6 Ϯ .7
5.5 Ϯ 1.6
7.8 Ϯ 5.2

45,700 Ϯ 20,300
181.6 Ϯ 46.2 (23)
181.5 Ϯ 31.1 (11)
31.5 Ϯ 6.7
25.1 Ϯ 9.4
7.4 Ϯ .7
6.5 Ϯ 1.7
6.1 Ϯ 3.8

29,300 Ϯ 5,800a
175.7 Ϯ 33.0 (8)
140.4 Ϯ 14.4c
38.9 Ϯ 9.2c
20.0 Ϯ 8.4c
7.4 Ϯ .7
5.8 Ϯ 1.6e
8.3 Ϯ 4.7a

62,800 Ϯ 12,700
182.2 Ϯ 44.5 (4)
204.7 Ϯ 19.2
29.7 Ϯ 5.9
32.8 Ϯ 5.4
7.7 Ϯ .5
7.7 Ϯ .5
3.4 Ϯ .6

Number of neurons drawn in the horizontal, sagittal, and coronal planes for the dorsal and ventral medial geniculate body (MGD and MGV) are 12, 0, and
1 and 7, 2, and 1, respectively. Neurons were grouped based on dendritic tree area into small area neurons (Ͻ40,000 ␮m2) and large area neurons (Ͼ40,000 ␮m2),
which corresponds to tufted and stellate morphologies, respectively. Description of each measurement is found in the text. Values are means ϮSD, with n in
parentheses. a Significantly different than stellate, P Ͻ 001. b Significantly different than MGD, P Ͻ 0.005. c Significantly different than stellate, P Ͻ 0.05.
d
Significantly different than stellate, P Ͻ 0.005. e Significantly different than MGD, P Ͻ 0.001.

2002

E. L. BARTLETT AND P. H. SMITH

versus tufted morphology. Therefore we made a series of
measurements on the dendritic arbors of several well-filled
MGB neurons to see more objectively whether two distinct
dendritic morphologies are indeed found in MGB.
Quantitative analysis of somas and dendrites of MGB
thalamocortical neurons
Measurements were made on 42 cell bodies, 19 from MGV
and 23 from MGD. Table 1 shows that the measured soma
areas were similar in dorsal and ventral divisions. Also compared in Table 1 are the dendritic characteristics of 10 welllabeled MGV neurons and 13 well-labeled MGD neurons.
Ventral division neurons had a fairly small range of arbor areas
(20,000 –35,000 ␮m2). MGD neurons, by contrast, had two
separate area ranges, with a total range of 19,000 – 81,000 ␮m2.
One range of MGD areas overlapped with the MGV areas,
whereas the other range was significantly larger and did not.
Therefore we classified neurons with dendritic areas Ͻ40,000

FIG. 1. Camera lucida drawings of Neurobiotin-labeled ventral medial
geniculate body (MGV) neurons. Quantitative analysis of MGV dendrites
indicates that all our labeled MGV neurons have tufted morphology, characterized by shorter dendrites that branch profusely within 50 ␮m of the cell
body, with varying degrees of dendritic tree orientation. Neurons 1, 3, 4, 6, and
7 were drawn in the horizontal plane, with rostral toward the page top (a) and
lateromedial represented horizontally on the page. Neurons 5 and 8 were drawn
in the coronal plane, with dorsal toward the page top and lateromedial
represented horizontally. Neuron 2 was drawn in the sagittal plane, with dorsal
toward the page top and rostrocaudal represented horizontally on the page.
Some MGV tufted neurons have dendrites that preferentially project in certain
directions (neurons 1, 2, 4, 6, and 7), while other neurons in both the horizontal
and coronal planes have dendrites that project in all directions in the plane
(neurons 3, 5, and 8). 2, axons. Scale bar applies to all cells.

entation but rather projected in all directions in the plane. The
primary dendrites of MGV neurons were fairly smooth,
whereas higher-order dendrites had irregular surfaces with
noticeable protrusions but very few dendritic spines.
Some MGD neurons had tufted dendritic trees resembling
those in the ventral division, with a comparable number of
primary dendrites that branched profusely and showed varying
amounts of orientation (Fig. 2, cells 2–5). Another group had
larger dendritic trees that did not branch as profusely and
extended in all directions in the horizontal or coronal planes,
conforming to earlier descriptions of MGD cells with ‘‘stellate’’ morphology (Clerici et al. 1990; Winer 1992) (Fig. 2,
cells 1, and 6 – 8). However, it was often difficult to qualitatively assess whether the features of these neurons, for example
dendritic length, branchiness of the dendritic trees close to the
cell body, and dendritic orientation, could distinguish stellate

FIG. 2. Camera lucida drawings of Neurobiotin-labeled dorsal medial
geniculate body (MGD) neurons. Examples of the 2 distinct morphologies in
MGD revealed by quantitative analysis of MGD dendrites. Neurons 1, 6, 7, and
8 have stellate morphology, characterized by long dendrites that branch moderately in all directions and have distal dendritic branchpoints. Neurons 2–5
have tufted dendritic morphology that is similar to the morphology of MGV
neurons. Some tufted neurons (especially neurons 2– 4) have dendritic arbors
that project preferentially in certain directions, with sparser projections in other
directions. Neurons 2– 8 were drawn in the horizontal plane. Neuron 1 was
drawn in the coronal plane. Orientation of the neurons on the page is the same
as in Fig. 1. 2, axons. Scale bar applies to all cells.

PROPERTIES OF RAT MEDIAL GENICULATE BODY NEURONS

␮m2 as small area neurons and neurons with dendritic areas
Ͼ40,000 ␮m2 as large area neurons and then analyzed the
dendritic characteristics of the two groups. The dendritic areas
of the small area MGD neurons were 27,800 ␮m2 on average,
comparable with the average MGV area (Table 1), whereas
those of the large area MGD neurons were 62,800 ␮m2. Measuring the three longest dendrites revealed that small area
neurons in both divisions had similar dendrite lengths. Dendrites of MGD large area neurons were significantly longer
(see Table 1), indicating that differences in dendritic tree area
was at least partially due to a difference in dendrite length.
Grouping cells according to the area of their dendritic trees
revealed other consistent differences between the two populations. The number of dendritic intersections (see METHODS) for
small area neurons in either MGV or MGD was significantly
larger than for large area neurons at 50 ␮m, but significantly
smaller at 100 ␮m. This result indicates that small area arbors
were more exuberant at 50 ␮m and that many small area
neuron dendrites ended between 50 and 100 ␮m from the
soma. When the number of sectors intersected (see METHODS)
was measured, at 50 ␮m, small and large area dendrites extended almost omnidirectionally, with most neurons having
dendrites intersecting seven or eight of eight possible sectors.
Dendrites of large area neurons continued to project in all
directions 100 ␮m from the soma, but dendrites of small area
neurons on average projected through only six of eight possible
sectors. Shorter dendrites and more ‘‘oriented’’ (see following
text) dendritic tree characteristics of small area neurons probably contributed to the decrease in the number of sectors
intersected at 100 ␮m. Orientation ratios (see METHODS) for
large area neurons at 100 ␮m were significantly smaller (Table
1), i.e., large area neuron dendrites are less oriented. However,
it should be noted that 6/17 small area neurons had ratios
similar to large area neurons at 100 ␮m, supporting our qualitative observation that not all small area cells have strongly
oriented dendritic arbors. Finally, we found that small area cell
dendrites in both MGV and MGD tended to have all branching
occur 20 – 60 ␮m from the soma, whereas large area dendritic
branching occurred fairly evenly 20 –120 ␮m from the soma.
Examples of distal branchpoints are seen in all the large area
arbors in Fig. 2 (cells 1, and 6 – 8). Based on these quantitative
results, the small area neurons conform to qualitative descriptions of tufted neurons, whereas the dendritic characteristics of
the large area neurons conform to descriptions of stellate
neurons. Although the distribution of dendritic lengths of
tufted (small area) and stellate (large area) neurons was nonoverlapping, individual tufted neurons could have nonoriented
dendritic arbors, and individual stellate dendrites could have
branching nearly as dense as typical tufted arbors.
Intrinsic properties of MGB neurons
The intrinsic properties of 31 MGV neurons and 25 MGD
neurons were analyzed in detail. As shown in Table 2, the
average resting membrane potential and average input resistance were similar throughout the MGB regardless of location
or cell type. Suprathreshold depolarizing current pulses elicited
burst firing in about one-third of the MGV and MGD neurons,
characterized by a large hump crested by one or more action
potentials in a high-frequency burst (Fig. 3B). This response
was not confined to a particular cell type. Cells in the burst

2003

TABLE 2. Comparison of intrinsic properties versus
MGB subdivision

n
Vrest, mV
Rin, M⍀
Percent burst at rest
Percent with sag
Freq. Ca2ϩ burst (Hz)
Number of spikes in rebound
After hyperpolarization maximum
amplitude, mV
Rectification

MGD

MGV

25
Ϫ64.7 Ϯ 6.4
68 Ϯ 29
36 (9)
20 (5)a
338 Ϯ 51
3.4 Ϯ 1.6

31
Ϫ64.3 Ϯ 4.9
61 Ϯ 31
32 (10)
61 (18)
365 Ϯ 86
3.4 Ϯ 1.2

2.8 Ϯ 1.9
15/25

2.5 Ϯ 1.6
18/26

n is the number of neurons. For percentage of neurons that burst and
percentage of neurons with sag, the number in parentheses indicates the actual
number of neurons observed with a burst or sag. All values shown are means
Ϯ SD. a Significantly different than MGV, P Ͻ 0.005, ␹2 test.

firing mode had a resting potential of Ϫ69.8 Ϯ 3.3 (SD) mV.
All MGB neurons could generate the burst after the offset of
hyperpolarizing current (a rebound burst, Fig. 3, A and B). The
average number and frequency of action potentials in the
rebound burst was similar throughout the MGB (Table 2). The
resting potential of bursting neurons was significantly more
hyperpolarized than those showing the tonic, or sustained,
firing mode at rest. The tonic firing mode, which is similar to
the ‘‘single-spike’’ mode of previous studies (Hu 1995; Hu et
al. 1994), was characterized by firing for all or most of the
duration of the current injection (Fig. 3D). Neurons in this
firing mode had an average resting potential of Ϫ61.7 Ϯ 4.4
mV and could be either morphology. Firing rate increased and
first-spike latency decreased with increasing current (Fig. 3D).
About half of the neurons in the tonic firing mode displayed
noticeable spike rate adaptation. Switching the membrane potential by injecting constant current into a cell changed the
firing mode of the neuron, indicating that the ability to burst or
fire tonically is possessed by all MGB neurons.
In our normal saline, there was no segregation of cells, based
on anatomic type or location, into a particular firing mode.
Because the finding that MGV and MGD neurons have similar
resting potentials differs from previous reports comparing
MGV and MGD neurons (Hu 1995; Hu et al. 1994), extracellular [Kϩ] was changed to match values used in the previous
studies. Cells switched from our normal saline to one containing 3 mM [Kϩ] showed a consistent hyperpolarization of the
membrane potential (3–5 mV) in both dorsal and ventral divisions. This manipulation could change a nonbursting cell into
the burst firing mode or lower the amount of current needed to
generate a burst in an already bursting cell. However, the lower
extracellular [Kϩ] did not divide MGB neurons into tonicfiring MGV and burst-firing MGD populations. Also, because
the preparation used in previous studies restricted the region of
MGB that could be sampled, neurons in the rostral quarter and
the medial third of the MGV and MGD were excluded. When
the remaining neurons were analyzed, the average resting
membrane potential and proportion of neurons bursting at rest
were similar between MGV and MGD. Finally, 15 MGD
stellate and 12 MGV tufted neurons were identified anatomically (see METHODS), and their intrinsic properties were compared. Again, all measured properties were similar with one
exception. This exception was the prevalence of a depolarizing

2004

E. L. BARTLETT AND P. H. SMITH

FIG. 3. Intrinsic properties of medial geniculate
body (MGB) neurons. A: responses of a MGV tufted
neuron (top) elicited by polarizing current pulses
(bottom). Larger (Ϫ0.3 nA) hyperpolarizing current
pulse generated a depolarizing sag (3) and a rebound burst. Equal but opposite current pulses
caused a smaller voltage change in the depolarizing
direction indicating rectification. Vrest ϭ Ϫ63 mV.
B: responses of a MGD tufted neuron (top) to ϩ0.5and Ϫ0.5-nA pulses (bottom). Cell responded to the
depolarization with a burst from resting potential
followed by a long-lasting afterhyperpolarization
(ahp, 1) that persisted for hundreds of milliseconds.
This cell also exhibited no sag and a rebound burst.
Vrest ϭ Ϫ69 mV. C: I-V curve for the neuron in A
and D illustrating the rectification in the depolarizing direction and the sag in the hyperpolarizing
direction. Voltage changes were averaged for time
windows 10 –30 ms (early) and 270 –290 ms (late)
after the start of current injection. D: same neuron as
in A. Suprathreshold responses (top 3 traces) to 0.4to 0.6-nA current pulses (bottom). Latency to firing
decreased and firing frequency increased as the
amount of current increases. In some neurons, large
current injections evoked an initial spike at the onset
of the current (not shown). ahp (1) can be seen after
the 0.6-nA current injection. Scale bars in D apply
to A, B, and D.

‘‘sag’’ during a hyperpolarizing current pulse in most MGV
neurons (Fig. 3A), which occurred only in a small number of
MGD neurons (Table 2). Of the four identified MGD cells
showing the sag, two (small sags in these neurons) had stellate
morphology, and two had tufted morphology. The I-V curve in
Fig. 3C, comparing the peak change in membrane potential (ᮀ)
with the change observed just before current offset (ϩ) in an
MGV neuron, reflects this sag as well as an outward rectification. The sag is thought to reflect activation of a Csϩ-sensitive,
mixed cation current (Ih) (Hu 1995; Tennigkeit et al. 1996).
Also, a smaller voltage deflection was observed for depolarizing compared with hyperpolarizing currents in most MGB
neurons (Fig. 3, A and C). The rectification probably reflected
4-aminopyridine-sensitive Kϩ currents activated by membrane
depolarization in MGB and lateral geniculate nucleus neurons (McCormick 1991; Tennigkeit et al. 1996, 1998). Another possible effect of Kϩ current activation is the afterhyperpolarization (ahp) that often occurred after the offset of
depolarizing current and could last hundreds of milliseconds
(Table 2, Fig. 3B).
IC inputs to MGB neurons
We previously described direct excitatory and inhibitory IC
inputs to MGB neurons (Peruzzi et al. 1997). Over half of the

tufted and stellate cells reported in this study (38/72) received
both, but there were variations. Figure 4 illustrates the four
patterns of IC synaptic input seen when colliculogeniculate
axons were stimulated electrically in the brachium of the
inferior colliculus (BIC). These patterns were named based on
the presence of a GABAA IPSP and its latency relative to the
EPSP latency. MGB neurons with only excitatory IC input
were called EX/O. EX is for ‘‘excitatory’’ and O signifies a
lack of an apparent GABAA IPSP (Fig. 4, E and F). Neurons
with only inhibitory IC input were named IN/O, IN is for
‘‘inhibitory’’ IPSP and O signifies a lack of a driven EPSP
(Fig. 4, G and H). If a GABAA IPSP preceded the EPSP, the
response was called IN/EX (Fig. 4, A and B), and if the EPSP
preceded the IPSP, it was called EX/IN (Fig. 4, C and D).
Because neurons with GABAA IPSPs almost always had a
GABAB component (43/44 of the IC inputs, 68/73 of the
descending inputs described in the following text), the GABAB
component was not included in the nomenclature. With one
exception (see following text), both tufted and stellate could
show any of the four patterns of synaptic inputs, and in this
small sample of cells, there was no obvious difference in the
distribution of the four patterns between the two cell types in
the two MGB divisions studied.
When gradually increasing the shock strength applied to the

PROPERTIES OF RAT MEDIAL GENICULATE BODY NEURONS

FIG. 4. Patterns of inferior colliculus (IC) synaptic responses. Responses
for 4 cells at a single membrane potential (left) and when polarized around rest
(right, horizontal line represents resting membrane potential). A and B: representative GABAA inhibitory/excitatory postsynaptic potential (IN/EX) response in a MGV neuron. Electrical stimulation of the brachium of the inferior
colliculus (BIC) produces a stimulus artifact (sa) followed by GABAA inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP), excitatory PSP (EPSP), and GABAB IPSP,
in that order. Vrest ϭ Ϫ61 mV. Vmem ϭ Ϫ55 mV in A. For this figure and all
following figures, the sa has been truncated. C and D: representative excitatory/inhibitory PSP (EX/IN) response in a MGV tufted neuron. BIC stimulation produced an EPSP, a GABAA IPSP, and a GABAB IPSP, in that order.
Trace in C is at Vrest (Ϫ68 mV). E and F: representative all-or-none excitatory
only (EX/O) response in a MGV neuron. Trace in E has a longer duration to
illustrate response duration. In E, no response was recorded at 1 stimulus
intensity (flat trace) but a slight increase in stimulus intensity generated a
suprathreshold response with a long-lasting EPSP. Many, but not all EX/O
responses were all or none (see Fig. 5A). Trace in E is at Vrest (Ϫ64 mV). G
and H: representative inhibitory only (IN/O) response in a MGV tufted neuron.
Trace in G has a longer duration to illustrate the GABAB time course and is at
Vrest (Ϫ64 mV). Scale bars in E apply to A, C, E, and G. For this and all
subsequent figures, x is the horizontal scale bar and y is the vertical scale bar.
A and C: x ϭ 25 ms, y ϭ 5 mV; E: x ϭ 100 ms, y ϭ 20 mV; G: x ϭ 100 ms,
y ϭ 5 mV. Scale bars in F apply to B, D, F, and H. B and D: x ϭ 10 ms, y ϭ
10 mV; F: x ϭ 10 ms, y ϭ 20 mV; G: x ϭ 40 ms, y ϭ 10 mV.

BIC, the EPSPs and IPSPs often had multiple discernible
amplitudes, implying that multiple IC fibers converge onto
single MGB neurons. The number of excitatory inputs converging on a single MGB neuron was small, with two to four
distinguishable amplitudes in most cases (3.0 Ϯ 1.9) (Fig. 5, A
and B). Multiple levels of excitation were noted for all response patterns. In most cases, the multiple peak amplitudes
were not due to the addition of an increasing inhibition to a
constant excitation because peak amplitude increased with
stimulus intensity. Also, multiple peak amplitudes still were
noted when the GABAA channel was blocked (not shown).

2005

Inhibitory IC inputs occasionally were isolated either by application of glutamate channel blockers APV and DNQX or by
stimulation of only inhibitory fibers. Similar to the excitatory
fibers, increasing the shock stimulus amplitude generated multiple IPSP amplitude levels (Fig. 5, C and D). In most cases, the
GABAB IPSP had the same, or a slightly higher, stimulation
threshold as the GABAA IPSP (Fig. 5, C and D). Thus more
than one IC inhibitory input also converges onto MGB relay
neurons. Generally, the number of discernible excitatory levels
was independent of input class, but some of the EX/O neurons
received a large, all-or-none EPSP. An example is shown in
Fig. 4E. When the intensity of the stimulus was low, no
response above baseline was seen. Increasing stimulus intensity slightly evoked a large suprathreshold EPSP. Although it is
difficult to tell if subsequent smaller EPSPs were obscured, the
evoked response size and duration did not change as stimulus
intensity was increased further, suggesting that only one fiber
was being stimulated.
Neurons receiving each type of IC input were found in
similar proportions in the dorsal and ventral divisions. Table 3
shows that there are approximately equal numbers of neurons
receiving EX/O and IN/EX input, the two most common
classes of input. However, only neurons with tufted morphology received a single, large, suprathreshold EPSP. There was a
higher percentage of EX/IN neurons in the dorsal division
(23%) than in the ventral division (7%), but the difference was
not statistically significant. About 10% of the neurons in either
subdivision received exclusively inhibitory IC input. It is possible that some cells exhibiting EX/O or IN/O patterns actually
receive both excitatory and inhibitory inputs from the IC because a small number of EX/O responses also showed a longduration IPSP (probably GABAB mediated), but the stimulus
electrodes only excited the fiber type whose response was
observed.
The PSP latency was related to the type of IC input. For
these monosynaptic inputs to MGB neurons, PSP latency provides a measure of the relative axonal conduction velocity of
each input. The EPSP latencies of EX/O inputs were significantly shorter than the latencies of IN/EX EPSPs (Table 3) in
both subdivisions. Bath application of the GABAA antagonists
bicuculline or SR95531 to neurons with IN/EX or EX/IN IC
inputs did not change the EPSP latency (Fig. 6,C and E). Early
GABAA IN/EX IPSPs had similar latencies to the EX/O cell
EPSPs throughout the MGB (Table 3), suggesting that axons
giving rise to EX/O excitatory input and IN/EX inhibitory
input had similar, relatively fast conduction velocities. MGV
neurons with EX/IN inputs had GABAA IPSP latencies like
IN/EX GABAA latencies, but their EPSP latencies were among
the fastest observed. In contrast, MGD GABAA IPSPs in
EX/IN cells were significantly longer than all other GABAA
latencies, whereas the EPSP latencies for these neurons were
significantly shorter than the IN/EX EPSP latencies. IN/O
GABAA latencies were comparable with the GABAA latencies
of IN/EX inputs. On the basis of these results, IC excitatory
input can be subdivided into short-latency inputs, which are
generally seen in EX/O or EX/IN categories, and long-latency
inputs, which are generally in the IN/EX category. The inhibitory IC inputs also can be grouped according to latency.
Shorter-latency IPSPs are associated with IN/EX, IN/O, and
MGV EX/IN inputs, whereas longer-latency IPSPs occur in
MGD EX/IN responses.

2006

E. L. BARTLETT AND P. H. SMITH

FIG. 5. Multiple IC excitatory and inhibitory inputs can
converge on a single MGB neuron. A: synaptic responses of
a MGD stellate neuron to BIC stimulation as stimulus intensity was increased from 10 to 150 V in 10-V steps. Increasing intensity generated 4 –5 distinguishable EPSP amplitudes. For clarity, not all traces are shown. Vrest ϭ Ϫ68 mV.
B: peak EPSP amplitude vs. shock intensity of BIC stimulation for the neuron in A. C: records from a different MGD
neuron showing multiple IPSP amplitudes for GABAA and
GABAB IPSPs to increasing shock strength while excitation
was blocked by DL-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (APV)
and 6,7-dinitroquinoxaline (DNQX). Again, not all traces are
shown. Vmem ϭ Ϫ54 mV. D: IPSP amplitude vs. shock
strength for the same neuron as in C, for the early and late
IPSP components. Scale bars, A: x ϭ 20 ms, y ϭ 5 mV; C:
x ϭ 50 ms, y ϭ 5 mV.

Pharmacology of IC inputs
EPSPs for stellate and tufted neurons had both ␣-amino-3hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and Nmethyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) components. There was considerable variation in how much each component contributed to the
EPSP. Like other dual component glutamatergic EPSPs, blocking AMPA channels diminished the fast portion of the EPSP,
resulting in a reduced peak amplitude and a longer time to
peak. Figure 6A shows a MGV tufted neuron response that still
has a large NMDA component during application of the
AMPA channel antagonist DNQX. Blocking the AMPA-mediated EPSP prevented a spike from occurring, even when a
sizeable NMDA-mediated EPSP remained (Fig. 6A, same cell
as in Fig. 4, E and F). Figure 6B shows a MGD stellate neuron
where DNQX largely abolished the EPSP. Conversely, in a
different neuron, blocking NMDA receptors with APV slightly
reduced the EPSP amplitude but significantly reduced the
EPSP’s area and duration (Fig. 6D, middle vs. bottom). The
effect of APV persisted even at hyperpolarized membrane
potentials for suprathreshold and subthreshold IC inputs. From
TABLE

3.

the same neuron as in Fig. 6D, Fig. 6E demonstrates that
blocking the NMDA component effectively prevented the
Ca2ϩ burst at Ϫ86 mV. An IC-evoked NMDA component at
hyperpolarized membrane potentials was seen in three other
cells tested in APV.
We also tested the effect of the monosynaptic GABAA IPSP
(Peruzzi et al. 1997) on the IC-evoked EPSP. Bath application
of the GABAA receptor antagonists bicuculline or SR95531
resulted in a larger, longer lasting EPSP in cells with IN/EX IC
inputs (Fig. 6, D and E, middle, and C, 5/5 cells tested) and
with EX/IN IC inputs (not shown, 2/2 cells tested), but they
had little effect on cells with EX/O IC inputs (2/3 cells tested).
In two MGD neurons, blocking GABAA receptors uncovered a
suprathreshold EPSP (Fig. 6, D and E). In the MGV, however,
the EPSPs revealed by drug application were subthreshold at
rest (Fig. 6C, n ϭ 5).
Timing of BIC evoked first-spike latencies
Typically, because of the Ca2ϩ burst and other voltagedependent conductances, synaptically generated first-spike la-

Patterns and latencies of synaptic input to MGB neurons
IC Inputs

Descending Inputs

IN/EX

EX/IN

EX/O

IN/O

IN/EX

EX/IN

EX/O

IN/O

16/41
12/31

3/41
7/31

17/41
9/31

5/41
3/31

46/60
21/31

1/60
0/31

11/60
7/31

2/60
3/31

3.8 Ϯ 1.3a
4.1 Ϯ 1.8a

1.1 Ϯ .3b
2.6 Ϯ .7b

2.3 Ϯ 1.3
2.2 Ϯ 1.0

na
na

3.4 Ϯ 1.0
3.7 Ϯ 1.2

2.3
na

3.2 Ϯ 1.1
2.9 Ϯ 1.5

na
na

2.0 Ϯ .6c
2.1 Ϯ .5c

2.0 Ϯ .1c
4.7 Ϯ .8d

na
na

1.7 Ϯ .6
2.0 Ϯ 1.2

1.8 Ϯ .5
1.9 Ϯ .6

1.6
na

na
na

1.7 Ϯ .7
2.1 Ϯ .8

16/16
12/12

3/3
7/7

2/17
4/9

5/5
2/3

41/46
20/21

1/1
0/0

2/11
3/7

2/2
3/3

n
MGV
MGD
EPSP latency, ms
MGV
MGD
GABAA latency, ms
MGV
MGD
GABAB present
MGV
MGD

n is the number of each pattern of synaptic input in each subdivision. Values are means ϮSD. IN/EX and EX/IN, GABAA inhibitory postsynaptic potentials
(IPSPs) preceded excitatory PSPs (EPSPs) and vice versa, respectively; EX/O and IN/O, only excitatory and only inhibitory, respectively, inferior colliculus
input. a Significantly different than EX/O EPSP latency, P Ͻ 0.001. b Significantly different than IN/EX EPSP latencies, P Ͻ 0.05. c Not significantly different
than EX/O EPSP latency, P Ͼ 0.05. d Significantly different than IN/EX and IN/O IPSP latencies, P Ͻ 0.001.

PROPERTIES OF RAT MEDIAL GENICULATE BODY NEURONS

2007

FIG. 6. Effect of drugs on MGB responses to BIC stimulation. A: responses of an EX/O MGV neuron to suprathreshold
stimulation of the BIC in normal saline and in saline containing the ␣-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid
(AMPA)/kainate glutamate receptor antagonist DNQX. B: responses of an EX/IN MGD stellate neuron to BIC stimulation in
normal saline and saline containing DNQX. In DNQX the EPSP is abolished while the IPSPs are left intact. Vmem ϭ Ϫ58 mV. C:
responses of an IN/EX MGV tufted neuron in normal saline and in saline containing the GABAA receptor antagonist bicuculline
(bicuc.). In bicuculline, the early IPSP was abolished more fully exposing the EPSP. Vmem ϭ Ϫ58 mV. D: response of an IN/EX
MGD cell to BIC shock stimulation of the same strength in normal saline, in saline containing the GABAA receptor antagonist
SR95531 or in saline containing SR95531 and APV at a depolarized Vmem ϭ Ϫ52 mV. SR95531 blocked the early IPSP and
exposed a large suprathreshold response (middle). A significant NMDA component of the EPSP was found by stimulation during
application of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist APV (bottom). Removal of the late NMDA component of the
EPSP reduced the spike output and uncovered a GABAB IPSP. E: response of the same neuron in the same solutions at a Vmem
ϭ Ϫ86 mV. NMDA component appears to be necessary for the neuron to burst at hyperpolarized Vmem (middle and bottom). Action
potentials in A, D, and E were truncated. Scale bars in E apply to A–E.

tencies of thalamic neuron are highly dependent on membrane
potential (Fig. 7, A–C) (Hu et al. 1994; Jahnsen and Llinas
1984a,b; McCormick 1991). However, two neurons with
IN/EX IC input exhibited exceptionally consistent first-spike
latencies that were independent of the membrane potential
(Fig. 7, D–F). Figure 7A illustrates a MGD tufted cell with an
EX/O IC input. Cells with this input were typically suprathreshold at both depolarized and hyperpolarized membrane potentials. The first-spike latency (FSL) was fairly consistent at
membrane potentials depolarized above levels where the Ca2ϩ
burst would be strongly activated (Fig. 7C, points above Ϫ70
mV). When hyperpolarized into the calcium burst mode of
firing, cells increased their FSL as hyperpolarization increased
(Fig. 7C, points below Ϫ70 mV). Changes in FSL Ͼ10 ms
were observed in some cases. The increased FSL appeared to
be caused by slow activation of the Ca2ϩ burst (Fig. 7B). In
contrast to the EX/O cells, IN/EX and EX/IN cells usually
generated synaptically induced spikes only at membrane potentials positive to Ϫ60 mV. Figure 7, D–F, illustrates one of
the two neurons with IN/EX IC input that was suprathreshold
at rest and its unusual spike response. Over a 40 mV range, the
FSL change was only 400 ␮s. Even when in the Ca2ϩ burst
firing mode (Fig. 7E), the action potential was evoked at a fixed
latency. Only the first spikes were well timed, later spikes were
not (Fig. 7D, later spikes).
Although we did not investigate the effects of bicuculline on

the neurons with well-timed FSLs, we did look at FSLs of one
neuron with IN/EX IC input and one with EX/IN IC input
during blockade of GABAA. In these two neurons, one of
which is shown in Fig. 6, D and E, middle, the timing of FSL
was similar to that of the EX/O neurons. This result supports
the idea that the inhibition is necessary to produce the consistent first spike latency.
Descending inputs to MGB neurons: corticothalamic EPSPs
and TRN IPSPs
In horizontal or sagittal slices, we also could stimulate the
descending corticothalamic (CT) and thalamic reticular nucleus (TRN) inputs in the thalamic radiations. Activating these
descending axons elicited a much more standardized response
than IC stimulation, eliciting a GABAA IPSP/EPSP/GABAB
IPSP sequence in 74% of both tufted and stellate neurons
throughout the MGB (Fig. 8, A and B, and Table 3). The
remainder received only excitatory corticothalamic input
(EX/O, 20%) or only inhibitory TRN input (IN/O, 5%). Again,
we cannot be certain whether EX/O and IN/O patterns reflect
the true innervation or the selective stimulation of one fiber
type.
Postsynaptic potential latencies were fairly uniform, regardless of neuron location or anatomic type (Table 3). Unlike IC
inputs, there was no significant difference in the corticotha-

2008

E. L. BARTLETT AND P. H. SMITH

FIG. 7. First-spike latency (FSL) of MGB responses to
BIC stimulation. A: suprathreshold responses of an EX/O
tufted neuron in the MGD to the same BIC stimulation at
various membrane potentials. FSL of action potentials are
fairly consistent for membrane potentials more than Ϫ70 mV
(2) but increase substantially for Vmem less than Ϫ70 mV
(spikes in brackets). B: example of a burst response in the
same neuron at Vmem equal to Ϫ80 mV, with an initial fast
EPSP followed by a slow depolarization that results in a
suprathreshold burst. C: graph of membrane potential vs.
FSL for this neuron, with a noticeable jump in FSL between
Ϫ70 and Ϫ75 mV. D: suprathreshold IN/EX response of a
MGD stellate neuron at various membrane potentials. FSL
appears to be fixed (2), regardless of Vmem. E: example of a
burst response in the same neuron at Vmem equal to Ϫ80 mV.
At this hyperpolarized Vmem, the GABAA IPSP is depolarizing and may activate the burst current and then is followed
closely by a large EPSP. Overall result is a rapid activation
of the Ca2ϩ burst and a short FSL. F: graph of membrane
potential vs. FSL for the same neuron. FSL does not change
over a large voltage range regardless of whether it is in the
burst or tonic firing mode. Scale bars in E apply to A, B, D,
and E.

lamic EPSP latency for neurons with IN/EX and EX/O patterns. Nor was there a significant difference in the TRN IPSP
latency between any group. Inhibitory TRN inputs consistently
had significantly shorter latencies than corticothalamic excitatory inputs (Fig. 8, A and B, Table 3), indicating that TRN
axons conduct faster than corticothalamic axons.
As shown in Fig. 8, C and D, stimulation of corticothalamic
axons generated a graded response, with significantly more
discernible levels of excitation (5.8 Ϯ 1.7) than excitatory IC
inputs (P Ͻ 0.0001, Mann-Whitney test). Likewise, blocking
glutamatergic transmission using channel blockers APV and
DNQX to isolate the GABAergic TRN input revealed multiple
amplitude levels for GABAA and GABAB IPSPs (4.0 Ϯ 1.4,
n ϭ 5). The number of amplitude levels for TRN inputs was
statistically similar to the number observed for IC IN/O responses. The increases in GABAA and GABAB IPSPs paralleled each other, suggesting that single terminals activates both
types of GABA receptor postsynaptically. Isolation of TRN
inputs with APV and DNQX also illustrated that, like IC
inhibitory inputs, descending TRN inputs are monosynaptic to
relay neurons (Fig. 8, E and F).
Pharmacology of descending inputs
Bath application of receptor antagonists confirmed that the
short-latency IPSP activated GABAA receptors (n ϭ 9, Fig. 10)
and the long-latency IPSP activated GABAB receptors (n ϭ 6,
not shown). Like the IC excitatory input, corticothalamic inputs to both types of MGB neurons had distinguishable AMPA
and NMDA components with considerable variation in the

contribution of each component for individual neurons.
NMDA receptor antagonists consistently caused a decrease in
the duration of the corticothalamic-evoked EPSP in both MGV
(Fig. 9, A and B) and MGD neurons (Fig. 9C) and occasionally
decreased the peak amplitude. (Fig. 9B). Coapplication of APV
and DNQX eliminated the EPSP completely (n ϭ 5, Fig. 8E).
Blocking NMDA receptors produced effects even at membrane
potentials (less than Ϫ70 mV) where NMDA receptors in other
brain regions are blocked by Mg2ϩ ions (Fig. 9, bottom). As
illustrated in Fig. 9B, addition of APV prevented a Ca2ϩ burst
activation at Ϫ77 mV. Thus the NMDA components of both IC
and corticothalamic inputs have an unusual voltage dependence. Furthermore the NMDA component can contribute to
the spike response of the burst depolarization.
Timing of suprathreshold corticothalamic responses
Given the modulatory function typically attributed to corticothalamic inputs, it was surprising that suprathreshold responses were evoked in a number of MGB cells by corticothalamic axon stimulation (Figs. 9C and 10). Like the
suprathreshold responses to the EX/O IC inputs (Fig. 7, A–C)
and unlike the suprathreshold responses to IN/EX IC inputs
(Fig. 7, D–F), the latency of the corticothalamic-evoked first
spike was dependent on membrane potential, regardless of the
presence or absence of a preceding GABAergic event (Fig. 10).
Cells of either morphology in both dorsal and ventral divisions
could be suprathreshold in response to stimulation of the descending inputs. Figure 10A illustrates synaptic and suprathreshold responses to shock stimulation of the descending

PROPERTIES OF RAT MEDIAL GENICULATE BODY NEURONS

2009

FIG. 8. Representative MGB response to thalamic radiation stimulation. Same neuron was used for A–D. A: responses of a MGD neuron with the IN/EX response to
thalamic radiation stimulation. Vrest equals Ϫ65 mV. B:
synaptic response at different membrane potentials on a
shorter time scale, illustrating reversal of early GABAA
IPSP. C: synaptic responses to increasing shock strength
showing increasing EPSP amplitude and indicating that a
large number of corticothalamic fibers converge on a single
MGB neuron. D: graph of peak EPSP amplitude vs. shock
intensity with a nearly linear increase in EPSP amplitude as
shock strength increases. E: responses of a MGD stellate
neuron to increasing thalamic radiation stimulation while in
APV and DNQX to block excitation. Vrest equals Ϫ71 mV.
F: graph of IPSP peak amplitudes at Vrest as shock strength
increases, indicating the convergence of a small number of
TR nucleus (TRN) inputs to MGB neurons and similar
thresholds for GABAA and GABAB responses. Scale bars in
A and E: x ϭ 100 ms, y ϭ 5 mV; B: x ϭ 40 ms, y ϭ 10 mV;
C: x ϭ 40 ms, y ϭ 5 mV.

input as the cell was moved around rest in normal saline and
while the GABAA IPSP was blocked. In normal saline, at
potentials more depolarized than Ϫ70 mV, the FSL was fairly
consistent, with a typical jitter of 1–2 ms (Fig. 10B). Like the
spikes generated by excitatory IC inputs in EX/O cells, the FSL
of CT-evoked spikes increased as the cell was hyperpolarized
due to slow activation of the regenerative Ca2ϩ depolarization.
The latency increase and the jitter when hyperpolarized were
not significantly affected by the TRN GABAA IPSP (Fig. 10B)
because they were unchanged in bicuculline. The inhibitory
TRN input did, however, make the production of synaptically
evoked spikes less likely at membrane potentials between Ϫ55
and Ϫ70 mV (Fig. 10).
DISCUSSION

Analysis of MGB morphology
Intracellularly recorded and filled MGV and MGD neurons
did not differ in soma size or shape, with pyramidal and round
somata of various sizes in both divisions. Similar results were
reported recently (Clerici and Coleman 1998) for Nissl-stained
rat neurons. In another study, MGD neurons were slightly but
significantly smaller than MGV neurons (Senatorov and Hu
1997). Because our results are based on a relatively small
number of cells throughout the dorsal and ventral divisions, we
may not have been able to detect small divisional differences.
However, we reiterate that there were large individual variations in neuron areas without any consistent divisional differences in soma size or shape.

Quantitative analysis of dendritic morphology provided support for described qualitative differences in MGB cell morphology (Clerici et al. 1990; Morest 1984), and a way to
distinguish tufted from stellate neurons. Such a quantitative
analysis allowed a more objective correlation of morphology
with physiology and location for individual cells. Tufted neurons in the MGV and MGD had shorter dendrites, a smaller
dendritic tree area, more profuse branching, and greater dendritic orientation compared with stellate neurons, which were
only found in MGD. In contrast to other anatomic studies
(Clerici and Coleman 1990; Hu et al. 1994; Morest 1964,
Morest 1965a; Winer and Morest 1983) most of our labeled
neurons were recorded and drawn in the horizontal plane
because we wanted to drive synaptic inputs. However, we
recorded from and drew a small number of neurons from
coronal and sagittal slices and observed no differences in
quantitative dendritic characteristics. Although tufted neuron
dendrites were significantly more polarized than stellate dendrites, they were not as strongly polarized as Golgi studies of
rat and cat have suggested. A lack of polarization was most
evident at Ͻ50 ␮m from the soma, where tufted neuron dendrites sometimes projected in all directions. One reason that we
observed longer dendrites and less oriented dendritic trees may
be that we analyzed single cells from relatively thick sections
(400 –500 ␮m). A previous rat Golgi study used 100- to
150-␮m sections (Clerici et al. 1990) and labeling of many
neurons in each section restricts analysis of dendrites to single
sections. Such restrictions could omit significant portions of
the dendritic tree found in adjacent sections. Anatomical stud-

2010

E. L. BARTLETT AND P. H. SMITH

FIG. 9. Effect of NMDA receptor blockade on corticothalamic excitation. Responses of 3 neurons (A–C) to shocks applied to
the thalamic radiations as the membrane potential is held above Ϫ60 mV (top), close to Ϫ65 mV (middle), and below Ϫ70 mV
(bottom). 2, traces recorded during APV application, other traces taken in normal saline. A: example of a MGV tufted neuron with
only a modest NMDA component that is still present at Ϫ77 mV (bottom). B: responses from an MGV tufted cell illustrating a
neuron that requires the NMDA component to generate a Ca2ϩ burst at Ϫ77 mV (bottom). C: recordings from a MGD neuron with
a strong NMDA component. NMDA component is necessary to produce a response with multiple spikes. Action potentials in B
and C were truncated. Scale bars in C (bottom) apply to all traces.

ies support the existence of laminae in MGV (Clerici and
Coleman 1990; Morest 1965a), which are thought to be the
anatomic substrate of isofrequency laminae recorded in vivo
(Aitkin and Webster 1971, 1972). Although the MGV may
have cell laminae and numerous neurons with dendrites projecting parallel to those laminae, the overlap of inputs received
by neurons in adjacent laminae is probably substantial on
dendrites that project orthogonally to the laminae. In the rat,
dendritic tree orientation may not be as significant a factor in
contributing to the narrow frequency response as long as the
proximal dendrites lie within a single cell lamina.
Differences in the dendritic characteristics of tufted and
stellate neurons resemble some of those described for cells in
visual and somatosensory thalamus. Somatosensory neurons in
the rat medial division of the posterior thalamic group and
ventrobasal complex had different morphologies but responded
similarly to tactile input (OHara and Havton 1994). In contrast,
cat dorsal LGN (dLGN) neurons have anatomic features that
are correlated fairly well with their visual responses (Friedlander et al. 1981; Humphrey and Weller 1988), including
specialized dendritic appendages that are involved in triadic
synapses with interneurons. Rat MGB neurons lack such specialized dendritic appendages and are more similar to rat somatosensory neurons. The morphological differences between
tufted and stellate MGB cells may reflect differences in how
afferents converge on them, but it is hard to know whether this
would cause PSPs to integrate differently to affect acoustic
response properties.

Intrinsic properties
Overall, the membrane characteristics we observed were
similar to those reported for a handful of neurons in medial
geniculate and a very large number of neurons in other thalamic regions (Crunelli et al. 1987; Jahnsen and Llinas
1984a,b; Pape and McCormick 1995; Turner et al. 1997).
However, in contrast to the previous results described from the
MGB (Hu 1995; Hu et al. 1994; Senatorov and Hu 1997), we
found that identified neurons in the ventral and dorsal divisions
of the MGB have similar intrinsic properties, with only a few
consistent differences (Table 2). Furthermore these properties
were not segregated by cell morphology. The main difference
in intrinsic properties was an increased prevalence of a sag
potential in MGV cells. This sag was the only intrinsic property correlated with morphology. Only tufted neurons, which
included MGV and some MGD cells, displayed a sag, but not
all tufted neurons displayed a sag.
A discussion of the possible discrepancies between our
results and those of the only other studies comparing intracellular characteristics of MGV and MGD neurons is warranted
because those studies have implied that differences in intrinsic
features could account for the nature of the different responses
to auditory stimuli seen in vivo when recording from dorsal
versus ventral division cells (Hu 1995; Hu et al. 1994). One
possible explanation for some of the differences is the [Kϩ] of
the salines, which has a controlling influence on resting membrane potential. However, changing our [Kϩ] to match that of

PROPERTIES OF RAT MEDIAL GENICULATE BODY NEURONS

2011

FIG. 10. Sensitivity of corticothalamic-evoked FSL to
Vmem and the effect of TRN GABAA receptor blockade.
A: responses of a MGV tufted neuron matched for DC
level, in normal saline and saline with bicuculline
(bicuc.), as the membrane potential was moved around
rest. 4, traces recorded during bicuculline application.
FSL increases with hyperpolarization even in normal saline with an intact TRN GABAA IPSP. Corticothalamic
EPSPs become suprathreshold between Ϫ58 and Ϫ71
mV when GABAA IPSPs are blocked, potentials that
were subthreshold in normal saline. B: graph of FSL vs.
Vmem in control and in bicuculline (bicuc.). Under both
conditions the corticothalamic-evoked FSL increases rapidly over a small voltage range at hyperpolarized Vmem.
Action potentials in A were truncated. Scale bar in A
(bottom right) applies to all traces.

the previous studies did not create populations of MGB neurons that were resolvable by resting potential, firing mode, or
subdivision nor did it alter our finding that both MGV tufted
and MGD stellate and tufted neurons could be in burst or tonic
mode.
A second possible explanation for the differences could be
the type of preparation used. Our recordings were done in a
400- to 500-␮m slice taken in any of the three standard planes
and from cells in all regions of the dorsal and ventral divisions.
Hu and colleagues used an ‘‘explant’’ preparation (Hu 1995;
Hu et al. 1994), where a portion of the unilateral diencephalon
containing the entire brachium of the IC and medial geniculate
was removed and isolated. With this preparation, they only
recorded from the caudal two-thirds to three-quarters of the
MGB because rostral MGB is obscured by the lateral geniculate nucleus and the brachium of the superior colliculus (Paxinos and Watson 1986) and only sampled cells Յ400 –500 ␮M
deep to the free surface of the MGB. Thus access was restricted
to the caudodorsal MGD and the caudal portion of the lateroventral division of the MGV (Clerici and Coleman 1990). Such
an explant preparation would leave more MGB circuitry intact,
but it is not clear whether structures deeper than 400 –500 ␮M
would still be viable. When we restricted our analysis to those
neurons that are accessible in the explant preparation, we still
found that MGV and MGD neurons had similar membrane
characteristics except for the increased percentage of MGV
neurons expressing a sag. Therefore differences in the regions
sampled do not appear to cause the conflicting results. In
addition, differences in morphology were not correlated with

differences in membrane properties because a comparison of
identified MGV tufted and MGD stellate neurons yielded identical results to the full populations of MGV and MGD neurons.
Another possible explanation is in the choice of experimental data. By comparing a selected subset of MGV cells that
were in single spike mode and MGD cells that were in burst
mode, a mean resting membrane potential that was 9 mV more
negative in MGD cells was noted (Hu 1995). We also note a
similar difference in membrane potential when comparing
bursting versus tonic firing neurons (see RESULTS). However,
our data taken from all sampled cells do not show such a
difference in membrane potential between areas or between
cell types. Because 20 –30% of MGV neurons in the explant
preparation were in the burst firing mode (Hu et al. 1994),
similar to the proportion found in our study (Table 2), exclusion of MGV bursting neurons when comparing MGV and
MGD resting potentials may have made the populations appear
more segregated than the total population of MGV and MGD
neurons. Using sharp microelectrodes, the difference in potentials was attributed to the presence of a Csϩ-sensitive sag
potential (Ih) found only in MGV neurons that was active at
resting potential (Hu 1995). We also have found the sag mainly
in MGV neurons, but our data indicate that tufted cells in MGD
also can display a sag potential. A whole cell recording study
also found enhanced activity of Naϩ-Kϩ-ATPase in MGD
neurons relative to MGV neurons (Senatorov and Hu 1997).
However, using sharp microelectrodes, the small divisional
difference in Naϩ-Kϩ-ATPase currents would not contribute to
a significant difference in resting potentials. Regardless of cell

2012

E. L. BARTLETT AND P. H. SMITH

morphology or location in the MGB, synaptic stimulation of
neurons in the present study could evoke bursts at hyperpolarized membrane potentials and one or more Naϩ spikes at
depolarized potentials. Together these data would bring into
question the notion that membrane potential, controlled by
intrinsic features of cells in dorsal versus ventral MGB, is a
controlling influence in response differences seen in vivo.
Thus in vivo, synaptic control of resting membrane potential
is probably a more powerful determinant of neuronal response
than intrinsic properties. Rat thalamic neurons receive cholinergic inputs from the laterodorsal tegmentum and pedunculopontine nucleus and noradrenergic inputs from the locus coeruleus (McCormick 1992). Both of these modulatory pathways
would be preserved in the explant preparation but not in the
slice preparation, but the nuclei are also deep enough that they
might be adversely affected in the explant. Mooney et al.
(1995) indicated that MGV neurons were depolarized out of
the burst range by application of muscarinic acetylcholine
receptor agonists, whereas MGD neurons were hyperpolarized.
In addition, activation of ␣-adrenoreceptors in thalamocortical
neurons can cause depolarization, whereas ␤-adrenoreceptors
also can cause depolarization by a positive shift in the activation curve of Ih (McCormick 1992). Because the difference
between MGD and MGV neuron resting potentials in the
explant preparation was due to the strong activation of Ih in
MGV tufted neurons, it is possible that selective activation of
␤-adrenoreceptors was able to cause the observed differences
in resting potential. Until an in vivo MGB intracellular recording study is done, we cannot know whether MGB neurons
normally are maintained at different membrane potentials.
Such a study also would help to determine the cause(s) of the
increased latency of MGD neuron responses to sound, such as
a long-latency Ca2ϩ burst (Hu 1995; Hu et al. 1994) or the use
of suboptimal acoustic stimuli to activate MGD neurons.
Inputs from the IC
BIC stimulation elicited excitatory and inhibitory synaptic
events in MGV and MGD neurons, and we have shown previously (Peruzzi et al. 1997) that they arise from monosynaptic
IC inputs. Here we analyze the relationship of the inhibitory
and excitatory IC projections. BIC stimulation most commonly
elicited IN/EX or EX/O responses, but EX/IN and IN/O responses also were evoked. Both MGV and MGD displayed
similar proportions of response combinations, but throughout
the MGB, suprathreshold EX/O responses were only observed
in neurons with tufted morphology. Increased synaptic amplitudes with increased shock intensity to BIC fibers implies that
IC excitatory and inhibitory PSPs often result from convergence of a small number of inputs. Analysis of PSP latencies
implied that there are excitatory and inhibitory IC axons that
conduct at different rates. Pharmacological blockade of
GABAA IPSPs did not change the EPSP latency for IN/EX or
EX/IN inputs, implying that the excitatory fibers generating
EX/O patterns may be a different population than those producing IN/EX patterns. Although this analysis cannot predict
the interaction of inputs that produces variable response latencies to sound observed in vivo, it can provide some insight into
the response combinations and relative timings of inputs necessary to produce the in vivo responses. The latency of IN/EX
EPSPs was significantly longer than the latency of EX/O

EPSPs, and the latency of IN/EX, IN/O, and MGV EX/IN
GABAA IPSPs was significantly shorter than the latency of
MGD EX/IN IPSPs. Anatomic evidence from cat (St. Marie et
al. 1997) has shown that a variety of sizes of both GABAergic
and non-GABAergic (presumably glutamatergic) fibers run in
the BIC that are thought to arise primarily from IC cells. Only
a small percentage of medium and small IC axons were
GABAergic, but about half of the large diameter IC axons
were. Thus it is probably not surprising that different EPSP and
IPSP latencies are observed and that the IPSPs often preceded
EPSPs. It is also probably not surprising, given the fairly large
population of small non-GABAergic axons reported that many
EPSPs are small and subthreshold. Taken together, these results support the notion that IC inhibition can be fast and may
precede excitation under some conditions in vivo. Certain
neurons in the awake mustached bat IC display significant
facilitation when a CF pulse and its doppler-shifted echo are
presented together compared with either stimulus presented
alone (Suga et al. 1997). This effect was enhanced by bicuculline iontophoresis, largely due to an increase in an APVsensitive late component (Suga et al. 1997). Blockade of
GABAA inhibition in our slices could uncover a robust suprathreshold IC input with a significant APV sensitive late
component (Fig. 6, D and E).
Pharmacological analysis showed that excitatory IC inputs
activated AMPA and NMDA glutamate receptors and inhibitory IC inputs activated GABAA and GABAB receptors. The
NMDA component was active even at hyperpolarized membrane potentials and could affect the MGB cell’s ability to
respond with a Ca2ϩ burst (Fig. 6E). Many of the IC EPSP
properties described here have been observed in the MGB and
other thalamic regions. Previous studies of rat MGB, LGN, and
ventrobasal complex (VB) neurons showed that stimulation of
ascending inputs to these regions evokes EPSPs with AMPA
and NMDA components (Hu et al. 1994; Kao and Coulter
1997; Turner et al. 1994). In the MGB, it was reported that IC
EPSPs in MGV neurons were largely due to AMPA receptor
activation, whereas those in MGD had a more equal mixture of
AMPA and NMDA components (Hu et al. 1994). Although we
did not investigate this issue in detail, our results indicate that
there are clear exceptions (Fig. 6A) and that the proportion of
each component may vary between neurons. Further study is
required to determine the extent of this variability and whether
the proportion of AMPA and NMDA components is related to
the MGB response pattern to IC input observed in the slice.
Like the present study, studies of the rat and cat dorsal LGN
showed a noticeable NMDA component, even at hyperpolarized membrane potentials ϽϪ75 mV, that was occasionally
necessary to evoke a Ca2ϩ burst in response to optic tract
stimulation (Esguerra et al. 1992; Turner et al. 1994). In these
LGN neurons, the NMDA component expanded the voltage
range of the burst. NMDA antagonists applied to the cat LGN
in vivo could reduce the visual responses of X and Y neurons
(Hartveit and Heggelund 1990; Heggelund and Hartveit 1990;
Kwon et al. 1992). The functional role of the IC NMDA
component in the MGB is unclear because the effects of
NMDA receptor agonists or antagonists on MGB neurons in
vivo have not been investigated in detail (Suga et al. 1997).
In agreement with a previous MGB study (Hu 1995) we
found that, for most cells with suprathreshold IC input, the
latency of the BIC-evoked first spike was dependent on mem-

PROPERTIES OF RAT MEDIAL GENICULATE BODY NEURONS

brane potential and EPSP height. In our study, suprathreshold
burst responses at hyperpolarized membrane potentials were
observed mainly in neurons not receiving inhibitory IC input
(EX/O input). When depolarized, evoked action potentials
were short latency and consistent, but hyperpolarization below
Ϫ70 mV greatly increased the FSL over a small voltage range
probably because of activation of the regenerative Ca2ϩ burst
and the increased time for the burst to reach spike threshold. If
neurons with EX/O inputs actually receive little or no IC
inhibition in vivo, then a burst response may be useful for the
amplification and detection of weak stimuli, which would not
require temporal precision. Receiver operating characteristics
analysis of cat LGN cells has shown that the burst mode is
suited for signal detection (Guido et al. 1995) and that LGN
neurons can burst during waking, especially during the initial
fixation to a visual stimulus (Guido and Weyand 1995). The
nonlinear increase in FSL with hyperpolarization and its interplay with EPSP height makes it unlikely that the burst response
is an analogue to temporal converter (Hu 1995) because multiple combinations of EPSP height and membrane potential
could produce the same FSL.
We noted that some neurons with inhibitory IC inputs could
fire short-latency action potentials at more depolarized membrane potentials, usually greater than Ϫ55 mV, and in two
cases, the neurons responded over a wide range of membrane
potentials both above and below rest. For these two neurons,
the FSL was independent of membrane potential. The unusual
short-latency response at hyperpolarized potentials appeared to
be caused by the combination of depolarizing inhibition rapidly
activating the Ca2ϩ burst followed closely by a large excitatory
input. Moreover, responses at different membrane potentials
may converge to produce a more uniform starting point on
which the EPSP is superimposed. Further experiments are
necessary to determine whether blocking inhibition will abolish the fixed FSL and whether the IPSP and EPSP latencies
affects the timing consistency. However, because block of
GABAA receptors in two neurons with IC inhibition revealed
poorly timed suprathreshold responses (Fig. 6, D and E), the
early IPSP probably has a significant role in generating welltimed first spikes. In the LGN, consistently timed spikes are
associated with the tonic firing mode, a state believed to be
suited for signal analysis (Guido et al. 1995). Because these
IN/EX cells seem to be combining signal amplification and
detection capabilities provided by the burst mode with the
consistently timed spikes useful for signal analysis, it implies
that they may be able to consistently analyze weak acoustic
stimuli.
Inputs from the cortex and the thalamic reticular nucleus
Stimulation of the thalamic radiations excited corticothalamic and TRN fibers, causing an IN/EX response in most
neurons. Overall, the corticothalamic excitatory input had more
distinguishable amplitude levels than IC input as the stimulus
intensity increased, implying that more corticothalamic fibers
converge onto single MGB neurons. Like the ascending IC
input, the excitatory corticothalamic inputs activated AMPA
and NMDA receptors, whereas the inhibitory TRN inputs
activated GABAA and GABAB receptors. The NMDA component of the corticothalamic excitatory input also had an unusual
voltage dependence with a detectable APV-sensitive compo-

2013

nent even at membrane potentials below Ϫ70 mV. Like the
EX/O IC input, the FSL of corticothalamic action potentials
was sensitive to membrane potential, regardless of whether
TRN inhibition was present.
Although this is the first intracellular description of descending input to MGB neurons, studies in other thalamic regions
have investigated the corticothalamic and TRN inputs. Stimulation of the internal capsule or cortex causes a combination of
EPSPs and IPSPs in somatosensory, motor, and anterior thalamic regions (Deschenes and Hu 1990; Kao and Coulter 1997;
Pare et al. 1991; Warren et al. 1994). In these studies, the EPSP
usually preceded the IPSP. We showed that the IPSP consistently preceded the EPSP. This discrepancy is probably due to
the different placement of the stimulating electrodes. Placement in the cortex or internal capsules would necessitate synaptic activation of TRN neurons that then would project to
thalamic neurons. Our placement in the thalamic radiations
directly activated TRN axons. Our responses suggest that TRN
axons conduct faster than most corticothalamic axons. Isolated
corticothalamic inputs in other thalamic regions were shown to
be composed of many smaller events (Deschenes and Hu 1990;
Warren et al. 1994), similar to our results for MGB neurons.
Stimulation of the descending inputs in other thalamic areas
also has been shown to activate AMPA and NMDA receptors
via cortical input and GABAA and GABAB receptors via TRN
input. GABAA receptor blockade or destruction of the TRN
resulted in substantial increases in EPSP amplitude that could
uncover a suprathreshold response (Deschenes and Hu 1990;
Eaton and Salt 1996; Warren et al. 1994), an effect that we also
have observed (Fig. 10A). In these studies, the NMDA contribution to the corticothalamic EPSP ranged from moderate
(Deschenes and Hu 1990; Eaton and Salt 1996), which was
observed most often in the present study (Fig. 9), to dominant
(Kao and Coulter 1997). Voltage-clamp analysis of cortical
inputs to rat VB neurons revealed substantial NMDA currents
between Ϫ50 and Ϫ80 (Kao and Coulter 1997). One possible
explanation is that NR2C and NR2D NMDA receptor subunits
are resistant to Mg2ϩ block at physiological resting potentials
and are present in the thalamus of young and adult rats (Kao
and Coulter 1997; Monyer et al. 1994; Wenzel et al. 1995,
1997). It is notable that both the IC and cortical inputs appear
to have similar unusual NMDA channel voltage dependence,
suggesting that both inputs may activate postsynaptic NMDA
receptors with similar subunit compositions.
Electrical stimulation of corticothalamic inputs can elicit
suprathreshold responses in vitro and in vivo (Deschenes and
Hu 1990; Kao and Coulter 1997; this study), implying that
these inputs could drive sensory responses of thalamocortical
neurons. This suggestion opposes the simply modulatory role
normally attributed to the corticothalamic input’s function
(Crick and Koch 1998; McCormick and Bal 1994). Although
electrical stimulation produces artificially synchronous activation of corticothalamic axons, cortical inputs appear to generate suprathreshold events in ventrolateral nucleus neurons during cortical ‘‘desynchronization’’ in anesthetized cats (Steriade
1997). During desynchronization, the cortical excitation of
TRN neurons appeared to be generally weak (Steriade 1997),
unlike the strong corticoreticular input during sleep spindles
and delta rhythms (Contreras and Steriade 1996; Contreras et
al. 1996; Destexhe et al. 1998; Steriade 1997). A class of
possibly interconnected corticothalamic neurons has been iden-

2014

E. L. BARTLETT AND P. H. SMITH

tified in the cat cortex that fires rhythmic high-frequency bursts
at 20 –50 Hz (Steriade et al. 1998), which might be able to
quickly synchronize corticothalamic neurons and provide a
strong excitatory corticothalamic input. Another characteristic
of inputs considered to be drivers is that they determine the
receptive field of the postsynaptic cell. In the mustached bat
MGB, focal inactivation of auditory cortex produced a best
frequency (BF) shift for cells the BF of which was slightly
different from the inactivated region of cortex (Zhang et al.
1997). Finally, cortex-dependent input can generate activity in
some cat MGB cells for hundreds of milliseconds after the
offset of acoustic stimulation, suggesting that cortical input
may cause action potentials in MGB neurons in the absence of
IC activity (Ryugo and Weinberger 1976).
The inhibitory TRN input was present in most MGB neuron
responses, and multiple fibers appeared to converge onto a
single MGB neuron (Fig. 8, E and F). Pharmacological blockade of TRN IPSPs invariably increased the corticothalamic
EPSP and could decrease the stimulus intensity necessary to
evoke a spike or increase the ability to spike over a greater
voltage range (Fig. 9A). Although the FSL increased as membrane potential decreased, which also occurred for EX/O IC
inputs, TRN inhibition had little effect on the corticothalamic
evoked FSL (Fig. 10). Thus TRN inhibition may not be as
strongly coupled to corticothalamic excitation as IC inhibition
is to IC excitation. It is also possible that TRN inhibition could
be associated more closely with ascending IC excitation because TRN activation preceding click stimuli could suppress
the click response in rat MGB neurons for 20 –30 ms (Shosaku
and Sumitomo 1983).
Correlation of MGB anatomy and physiology
In support of the hypothesis that the dendritic architecture of
MGB neurons does not predict their in vivo responses, we
found only a few consistent differences between tufted and
stellate neurons physiologically in vitro. Only tufted neurons
displayed a depolarizing sag, as reported in previous studies
(Hu 1995). Because we found that the resting potential of
tufted and stellate neurons was similar, the significance of the
sag in tufted neurons is unclear. Perhaps the resting potential of
tufted neurons can be modulated by changing the voltage
dependence of the sag activation by modulatory neurotransmitters (Banks et al. 1993; Pape and McCormick 1989), the sag
curtails the inhibitory duration of GABAB inhibition, or it
promotes a more robust rebound burst after hyperpolarization
(Luthi and McCormick 1998). The latter hypothesis is less
likely because we did not observe an enhanced burst frequency
or number of spikes in MGV neurons compared with MGD
neurons.
Only a subset of tufted neurons were capable of responding
to BIC stimulation with a large all-or-none EPSP that was often
suprathreshold. These EPSPs may be the physiological equivalent of large excitatory afferents observed at the light and
electron microscopic levels in the cat and hamster (Campbell
and Frost 1988; Jones and Rockel 1971; Majorossy and Kiss
1976) and at the light level in ferret and guinea pig (Malmierca
et al. 1997; Pallas and Sur 1994). It is possible that MGD tufted
neurons receiving this large excitatory input are those that
project to layer IV of primary auditory cortex (Mitani et al.
1987). Such a projection would blur the classification of MGV

as a lemniscal or first-order thalamic nucleus and MGD as an
extralemniscal or higher-order thalamic nucleus (Guillery
1995). Finally, one of the neurons with a fixed FSL at all
potentials had stellate morphology and was found in the MGD.
The general lack of correlation of morphology or MGB subdivision with intrinsic physiology implies that most MGB
neurons can perform a similar spectrum of transformations of
synaptic input. It further indicates that MGB acoustic responses are dictated mainly by the combination and pattern of
synaptic inputs that MGB neurons receive. Future studies
should investigate whether MGB neurons might receive specific combinations of input designed to process particular stimulus features. One might expect that neurons receiving EX/O
IC inputs would process inputs in a manner similar to LGN or
VB neurons receiving EX/O retinal or trigeminal input, but
MGB neurons receiving IN/EX inputs might have more complex responses reflecting their unique pattern of innervation
from ascending inputs.
We are indebted to J. Ekleberry, J. Meister, and I. Siggelkow for excellent
technical assistance. We thank D. Uhlrich and R. Guillery for helpful comments on a draft of the manuscript and W. Rhode for the use of his Neurolucida
system.
This work was supported by the National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communications Disorders Grant DC-00116 and funds provided by a grant to
the University of Wisconsin Medical School from the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute Research Resources Program for Medical Schools.
Address for reprint requests: P. H. Smith, Dept. of Anatomy, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706-1532.
Received 24 August 1998; accepted in final form 13 January 1999.

REFERENCES
ADAMS, J. C. Heavy metal intensification of DAB-based HRP reaction product.
J. Histochem. Cytochem. 29: 775, 1981.
AGHAJANIAN, G. K. AND RASMUSSEN. Intracellular studies in the facial nucleus
illustrating a simple new method for obtaining viable motor neurons in adult
rat brain slices. Synapse 3: 331–338, 1989.
AITKIN, L. M. AND PRAIN, S. M. Medial geniculate body: unit responses in the
awake cat. J. Neurophysiol. 37: 512–521, 1974.
AITKIN, L. M. AND WEBSTER, W. R. Tonotopic organization in the medial
geniculate body of the cat. Brain Res. 26: 402– 405, 1971.
AITKIN, L. M. AND WEBSTER, W. R. Medial geniculate body of the cat:
organization and responses to tonal stimuli of neurons in ventral division.
J. Neurophysiol. 35: 365–380, 1972.
ALLON, N., YESHURUN, Y., AND WOLLBERG, Z. Responses of single cells in the
medial geniculate body of awake squirrel monkeys. Exp. Brain Res. 41:
222–232, 1981.
ANDERSEN, R. A., ROTH, G. L., AITKIN, L. M., AND MERZENICH, M. M. The
efferent projections of the central nucleus and the pericentral nucleus of the
inferior colliculus in the cat. J. Comp. Neurol. 194: 649 – 662, 1980.
BAJO, V. M., ROUILLER, E. M., WELKER, E., CLARKE, S., VILLA, A. E., DE
RIBAUPIERRE, Y., AND DE RIBAUPIERRE F. Morphology and spatial distribution of corticothalamic terminals originating from the cat auditory cortex.
Hear. Res. 83: 161–174, 1995.
BANKS, M. I., PEARCE, R. A., AND SMITH, P. H. Hyperpolarization-activated
cation current (Ih) in neurons of the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body:
voltage clamp analysis and enhancement by norepinephrine and cAMP
suggest a modulatory mechanism in the auditory brainstem. J. Neurophysiol.
70: 1420 –1432, 1993.
BORDI, F. AND LEDOUX, J. E. Response properties of single units in areas of rat
auditory thalamus that project to the amygdala. I. Acoustic discharge patterns and frequency receptive fields. Exp. Brain Res. 98: 261–274, 1994.
BOURASSA, J. AND DESCHENES, M. Corticothalamic projections from the primary visual cortex in rats: a single fiber study using biocytin as an anterograde tracer. Neuroscience 66: 253–263, 1995.
BOURASSA, J., PINAULT, D., AND DESCHENES, M. Corticothalamic projections
from the cortical barrel field to the somatosensory thalamus in rats: a

PROPERTIES OF RAT MEDIAL GENICULATE BODY NEURONS
single-fibre study using biocytin as an anterograde tracer. Eur. J. Neurosci.
7: 19 –30, 1995.
CALFORD, M. B. The parcellation of the medial geniculate body of the cat
defined by the auditory response properties of single units. J. Neurosci. 3:
2350 –2364, 1983.
CALFORD, M. B. AND AITKIN, L. M. Ascending projections to the medial
geniculate body of the cat: evidence for multiple, parallel auditory pathways
through thalamus. J. Neurosci. 3: 2365–2380, 1983.
CALFORD, M. B. AND WEBSTER, W. R. Auditory representation within principal
division of cat medial geniculate body: an electrophysiology study. J. Neurophysiol. 45: 1013–1028, 1981.
CAMPBELL, G. AND FROST, D. O. Synaptic organization of anomalous retinal
projections to the somatosensory and auditory thalamus: target-controlled
morphogenesis of axon terminals and synaptic glomeruli. J. Comp. Neurol.
272: 383– 408, 1988.
CLAREY, J. C., BARONE, P., AND IMIG, T. J. Physiology of thalamus and cortex.
In: The Mammalian Auditory Pathway: Neurophysiology, edited by A. N.
Popper and R. R. Fay. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992, p. 232–334.
CLERICI, W. J. AND COLEMAN, J. R. Anatomy of the rat medial geniculate body.
I. Cytoarchitecture, myeloarchitecture, and neocortical connectivity.
J. Comp. Neurol. 297: 14 –31, 1990.
CLERICI, W. J. AND COLEMAN, J. R. Postnatal cytoarchitecture of the rat medial
geniculate body. J. Comp. Neurol. 399: 110 –124, 1998.
CLERICI, W. J., MCDONALD, A. J., THOMPSON, R., AND COLEMAN, J. R. Anatomy of the rat medial geniculate body. II. Dendritic morphology. J. Comp.
Neurol. 297: 32–54, 1990.
CONTRERAS, D., DESTEXHE, A., SEJNOWSKI, T. J., AND STERIADE, M. Control of
spatiotemporal coherence of a thalamic oscillation by corticothalamic feedback. Science 274: 771–774, 1996.
CONTRERAS, D. AND STERIADE, M. Spindle oscillation in cats: the role of
corticothalamic feedback in a thalamically generated rhythm [published
erratum] J. Physiol. (Lond.) 490: 159 –179, 1996.
CRABTREE, J. W. Organization in the auditory sector of the cat’s thalamic
reticular nucleus. J. Comp. Neurol. 390: 167–182, 1998.
CRICK, F. AND KOCH, C. Constraints on cortical and thalamic projections: the
no-strong-loops hypothesis. Nature 391: 245–250, 1998.
CRUNELLI, V., KELLY, J. S., LERESCHE, N., AND PIRCHIO, M. The ventral and
dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the rat: intracellular recordings in vitro.
J. Physiol. (Lond.). 384: 587– 601, 1987a.
CRUNELLI, V., LERESCHE, N., AND PARNAVELAS, J. G. Membrane properties of
morphologically identified X and Y cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus of
the cat in vitro. J. Physiol. (Lond.). 390: 243–256, 1987b.
DESCHENES, M. AND HU, B. Electrophysiology and pharmacology of the
corticothalamic input to lateral thalamic nuclei: an intracelluar study in the
cat. Eur. J. Neurosci. 2: 140 –152, 1990.
DESTEXHE, A., CONTRERAS, D., AND STERIADE, M. Mechanisms underlying the
synchronizing action of corticothalamic feedback through inhibition of
thalamic relay cells. J. Neurophysiol. 79: 999 –1016, 1998.
EATON, S. A. AND SALT, T. E. Role of N-methyl-D-aspartate and metabotropic
glutamate receptors in corticothalamic excitatory postsynaptic potentials in
vivo. Neuroscience 73: 1–5, 1996.
ESGUERRA, M., KWON, Y. H., AND SUR, M. Retinogeniculate EPSPs recorded
intracellularly in the ferret lateral geniculate nucleus in vitro: role of NMDA
receptors. Vis. Neurosci. 8: 545–555, 1992.
FRIEDLANDER, M. J., LIN, C. S., STANFORD, L. R., AND SHERMAN, S. M.
Morphology of functionally identified neurons in lateral geniculate nucleus
of the cat. J. Neurophysiol. 46: 80 –129, 1981.
GILBERT, C. D. AND KELLY, J. P. The projections of cells in different layers of
the cat’s visual cortex. J. Comp. Neurol. 163: 81–105, 1975.
GUIDO, W., LU, S. M., VAUGHAN, J. W., GODWIN, D. W., AND SHERMAN, S. M.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis of neurons in the cat’s
lateral geniculate nucleus during tonic and burst response mode. Vis. Neurosci. 12: 723–741, 1995.
GUIDO, W. AND WEYAND, T. Burst responses in thalamic relay cells of the
awake behaving cat. J. Neurophysiol. 74: 1782–1786, 1995.
GUILLERY, R. W. Anatomical evidence concerning the role of the thalamus in
corticocortical communication: a brief review. J. Anat. 187: 583–592, 1995.
HARTVEIT, E. AND HEGGELUND, P. Neurotransmitter receptors mediating excitatory input to cells in the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. II. Nonlagged cells.
J. Neurophysiol. 63: 1361–1372, 1990.
HEGGELUND, P. AND HARTVEIT, E. Neurotransmitter receptors mediating excitatory input to cells in the cat lateral geniculate nucleus. I. Lagged cells. J.
Neurophysiol. 63: 1347–1360, 1990.

2015

HOOGLAND, P. V., WELKER, E., AND VAN DER LOOS, H. Organization of the
projections from barrel cortex to thalamus in mice studied with Phaseolus
vulgaris-leucoagglutinin and HRP. Exp. Brain Res. 68: 73– 87, 1987.
HOOGLAND, P. V., WOUTERLOOD, F. G., WELKER, E., AND VAN DER LOOS, H.
Ultrastructure of giant and small thalamic terminals of cortical origin: a
study of the projections from the barrel cortex in mice using Phaseolus
vulgaris leuco-agglutinin (PHA-L). Exp. Brain Res. 87: 159 –172, 1991.
HU, B. Cellular basis of temporal synaptic signalling: an in vitro electrophysiological study in rat auditory thalamus. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 483: 167–182,
1995.
HU, B., SENATOROV, V., AND MOONEY, D. Lemniscal and non-lemniscal
synaptic transmission in rat auditory thalamus. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 479:
217–231, 1994.
HUMPHREY, A. L. AND WELLER, R. E. Structural correlates of functionally
distinct X-cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the cat. J. Comp. Neurol.
268: 448 – 468, 1988.
IMIG, T. J. AND MOREL, A. Tonotopic organization in ventral nucleus of medial
geniculate body in the cat. J. Neurophysiol. 53: 309 –340, 1985.
IRVINE, D. R. Physiology of the auditory brainstem. In: The Mammalian
Auditory Pathway: Neurophysiology, edited by R. R. Fay and A. N. Popper.
New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992, p. 152–231.
JAHNSEN, H. AND LLINAS, R. Ionic basis for the electro-responsiveness and
oscillatory properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurones in vitro. J. Physiol.
(Lond.) 349: 227–247, 1984a.
JAHNSEN, H. AND LLINAS, R. Electrophysiological properties of guinea-pig
thalamic neurones: an in vitro study. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 349: 205–226,
1984b.
JONES, E. G. Some aspects of the organization of the thalamic reticular
complex. J. Comp. Neurol. 162: 285–308, 1975.
JONES, E. G. AND POWELL, T. P. An electron microscopic study of the mode of
termination of cortico-thalamic fibres within the sensory relay nuclei of the
thalamus. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 172: 173–185, 1969a.
JONES, E. G. AND POWELL, T. P. Electron microscopy of synaptic glomeruli in
the thalamic relay nuclei of the cat. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 172:
153–171, 1969b.
JONES, E. G. AND ROCKEL, A. J. The synaptic organization in the medial
geniculate body of afferent fibres ascending from the inferior colliculus. Z.
Zellforsch. Mikrosk. Anat. 113: 44 – 66, 1971.
KAO, C. Q. AND COULTER, D. A. Physiology and pharmacology of corticothalamic stimulation-evoked responses in rat somatosensory thalamic neurons
in vitro. J. Neurophysiol. 77: 2661–2676, 1997.
KUDO, M. AND NIIMI, K. Ascending projections of the inferior colliculus onto
the medial geniculate body in the cat studied by anterograde and retrograde
tracing techniques. Brain Res. 155: 113–117, 1978.
KUDO, M. AND NIIMI, K. Ascending projections of the inferior colliculus in the
cat: an autoradiographic study. J. Comp. Neurol. 191: 545–556, 1980.
KWON, Y. H., NELSON, S. B., TOTH, L. J., AND SUR, M. Effect of stimulus
contrast and size on NMDA receptor activity in cat lateral geniculate
nucleus. J. Neurophysiol. 68: 182–196, 1992.
LEDOUX, J. E., RUGGIERO, D. A., AND REIS, D. J. Projections to the subcortical
forebrain from anatomically defined regions of the medial geniculate body
in the rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 242: 182–213, 1985.
LUND, J. S., LUND, R. D., HENDRICKSON, A. E., BUNT, A. H., AND FUCHS, A. F.
The origin of efferent pathways from the primary visual cortex, area 17, of
the macaque monkey as shown by retrograde transport of horseradish
peroxidase. J. Comp. Neurol. 164: 287–303, 1975.
LUTHI, A. AND MCCORMICK, D. A. Periodicity of thalamic synchronized
oscillations: the role of Ca2ϩ-mediated upregulation of Ih. Neuron 20:
553–563, 1998.
MAJOROSSY, K. AND KISS, A. Specific patterns of neuron arrangement and of
synaptic articulation in the medial geniculate body. Exp. Brain Res. 26:
1–17, 1976.
MAJOROSSY, K. AND RETHELYI, M. Synaptic architecture in the medial geniculate body (ventral division). Exp. Brain Res. 6: 306 –323, 1968.
MALMIERCA, M. S., REES, A., AND LEBEAU, F.E.N. Ascending projections to
the medial geniculate body from physiologically identified loci in the
inferior colliculus. In: Acoustical Signal Processing in the Central Auditory
System, edited by J. Syka. New York: Plenum Press, 1997, p. 295–302.
MCCORMICK, D. A. Functional properties of a slowly inactivating potassium
current in guinea pig dorsal lateral geniculate relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 66: 1176 –1189, 1991.
MCCORMICK, D. A. Neurotransmitter actions in the thalamus and cerebral
cortex and their role in neuromodulation of thalamocortical activity. Prog.
Neurobiol. 39: 337–398, 1992.

2016

E. L. BARTLETT AND P. H. SMITH

MCCORMICK, D. A. AND BAL, T. Sensory gating mechanisms of the thalamus.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 4: 550 –556, 1994.
MCCORMICK, D. A. AND PAPE, H. C. Properties of a hyperpolarization-activated cation current and its role in rhythmic oscillation in thalamic relay
neurones. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 431: 291–318, 1990a.
MCCORMICK, D. A. AND PAPE, H. C. Noradrenergic and serotonergic modulation of a hyperpolarization-activated cation current in thalamic relay neurones. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 431: 319 –342, 1990b.
MITANI, A., ITOH, K., AND MIZUNO, N. Distribution and size of thalamic
neurons projecting to layer I of the auditory cortical fields of the cat
compared to those projecting to layer IV. J. Comp. Neurol. 257: 105–121,
1987.
MONTERO, V. M. Ultrastructural identification of axon terminals from the
thalamic reticular nucleus in the medial geniculate body in the rat: an EM
autoradiographic study. Exp. Brain Res. 51: 338 –342, 1983.
MONYER, H., BURNASHEV, N., LAURIE, D. J., SAKMANN, B., AND SEEBURG, P. H.
Developmental and regional expression in the rat brain and functional
properties of four NMDA receptors. Neuron 12: 529 –540, 1994.
MOONEY, D. M., HU, B., AND SENATOROV, V. V. Muscarine induces an
anomalous inhibition of synaptic transmission in rat auditory thalamic
neurons in vitro. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 275: 838 – 844, 1995.
MOREST, D. K. The neuronal architecture of the medial geniculate body of the
cat. J. Anat. 98: 611– 630, 1964.
MOREST, D. K. The laminar structure of the medial geniculate body of the cat.
J. Anat. 99: 143–160, 1965a.
MOREST, D. K. The lateral tegmental system of the midbrain and the medial
geniculate body: study with Golgi and Nauta methods in the cat. J. Anat. 99:
611– 634, 1965b.
NELSON, P. G. AND ERULKAR, S. D. Synaptic mechanisms of excitation and
inhibition in the central auditory pathway. J. Neurophysiol. 26: 908 –923,
1963.
OHARA, P. T. AND HAVTON, L. A. Dendritic architecture of rat somatosensory
thalamorcortical projection neurons. J. Comp. Neurol. 341: 159 –171, 1994.
OJIMA, H. Terminal morphology and distribution of corticothalamic fibers
originating from layers 5 and 6 of cat primary auditory cortex. Cereb. Cortex
4: 646 – 663, 1994.
PALLAS, S. L. AND SUR, M. Morphology of retinal axon arbors induced to
arborize in a novel target, the medial geniculate nucleus. II. Comparison
with axons from the inferior colliculus. J. Comp. Neurol. 349: 363–376,
1994.
PAPE, H. C. AND MCCORMICK, D. A. Noradrenaline and serotonin selectively
modulate thalamic burst firing by enhancing a hyperpolarization-activated
cation current. Nature 340: 715–718, 1989.
PAPE, H. C. AND MCCORMICK, D. A. Electrophysiological and pharmacological
properties of interneurons in the cat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus. Neuroscience 68: 1105–1125, 1995.
PARE, D., DOSSI, R. C., AND STERIADE, M. Three types of inhibitory postsynaptic potentials generated by interneurons in the anterior thalamic complex
of cat. J. Neurophysiol. 66: 1190 –1204, 1991.
PAXINOS, G. AND WATSON, C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. San
Diego: Academic Press, 1986.
PERUZZI, D., BARTLETT, E., SMITH, P. H., AND OLIVER, D. L. A monosynaptic
GABAergic input from the inferior colliculus to the medial geniculate body
in rat. J. Neurosci. 17: 3766 –3777, 1997.
ROUILLER, E. M., COLOMB, E., CAPT, M., AND DE RIBAUPIERRE, F. Projections
of the reticular complex of the thalamus onto physiologically characterized
regions of the medial geniculate body. Neurosci. Let. 53: 227–232, 1985.
ROUILLER, E. M. AND DE RIBAUPIERRE, F. Origin of afferents to physiologically
defined regions of the medial geniculate body of the cat: ventral and dorsal
divisions. Hear. Res. 19: 97–114, 1985.
ROUILLER, E. M. AND WELKER, E. Morphology of corticothalamic terminals
arising from the auditory cortex of the rat: a Phaseolus vulgaris-leucoagglutinin (PHA-L) tracing study. Hear. Res. 56: 179 –190, 1991.
RYUGO, D. K. AND WEINBERGER, N. M. Corticofugal modulation of the medial
geniculate body. Exp. Neurol. 51: 377–391, 1976.
ST. MARIE, R. L., STANFORTH, D. A., AND JUBELIER, E. M. Substrate for rapid
feedforward inhibition of the auditory forebrain. Brain Res. 765: 173–176,
1997.

SENATOROV, V. V., MOONEY, D., AND HU, B. The electrogenic effects of
Na(ϩ)-K(ϩ)-ATPase in rat auditory thalamus. J. Physiol. 502: 375–385,
1997.
SENATOROV, V. V. AND HU, B. Differential Na(ϩ)-K(ϩ)-ATPase activity in rat
lemniscal and non-lemniscal auditory thalami. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 502:
387–395, 1997.
SHOSAKU, A. AND SUMITOMO, I. Auditory neurons in the rat thalamic reticular
nucleus. Exp. Brain Res. 49: 432– 442, 1983.
SMITH, P. H. Anatomy and physiology of multipolar cells in the rat inferior
collicular cortex using the in vitro brain slice technique. J. Neurosci. 12:
3700 –3715, 1992.
STERIADE, M. Synchronized activities of coupled oscillators in the cerebral
cortex and thalamus at different levels of vigilance. Cereb. Cortex 7:
583– 604, 1997.
STERIADE, M., TIMOFEEV, I., DURMULLER, N., AND GRENIER, F. Dynamic
properties of corticothalamic neurons and local cortical interneurons generating fast rhythmic (30 – 40 Hz) spike bursts. J. Neurophysiol. 79: 483– 490,
1998.
SUGA, N., ZHANG, Y., AND YAN, J. Sharpening of frequency tuning by inhibition in the thalamic auditory nucleus of the mustached bat. J. Neurophysiol.
77: 2098 –2114, 1997.
TENNIGKEIT, F., SCHWARZ, D. W., AND PUIL, E. Mechanisms for signal transformation in lemniscal auditory thalamus. J. Neurophysiol. 76: 3597–3608,
1996.
TENNIGKEIT, F., SCHWARZ, D. W., AND PUIL, E. Modulation of bursts and
high-threshold calcium spikes in neurons of rat auditory thalamus. Neuroscience 83: 1063–1073, 1998.
TURNER, J. P., ANDERSON, C. M., WILLIAMS, S. R., AND CRUNELLI, V. Morphology and membrane properties of neurones in the cat ventrobasal thalamus in vitro. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 505: 707–726, 1997.
TURNER, J. P., LERESCHE, N., GUYON, A., SOLTESZ, I., AND CRUNELLI, V.
Sensory input and burst firing output of rat and cat thalamocortical cells: the
role of NMDA and non-NMDA receptors. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 480: 281–295,
1994.
WARREN, R. A., AGMON, A., AND JONES, E. G. Oscillatory synaptic interactions
between ventroposterior and reticular neurons in mouse thalamus in vitro.
J. Neurophysiol. 72: 1993–2003, 1994.
WENZEL, A., FRITSCHY, J. M., MOHLER, H., AND BENKE, D. NMDA receptor
heterogeneity during postnatal development of the rat brain: differential
expression of the NR2A, NR2B, and NR2C subunit proteins. J. Neurochem.
68: 469 – 478, 1997.
WENZEL, A., SCHEURER, L., KUNZI, R., FRITSCHY, J. M., MOHLER, H., AND
BENKE, D. Distribution of NMDA receptor subunit proteins NR2A, 2B, 2C
and 2D in rat brain. Neuroreport 7: 45– 48, 1995.
WINER, J. A. The functional architecture of the medial geniculate body and the
primary auditory cortex. In: The Mammalian Auditory Pathway: Neuroanatomy, edited by R. R. Fay, A. N. Popper and D. B. Webster. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1992, p. 222– 409.
WINER, J. A. AND LARUE, D. T. Anatomy of glutamic acid decarboxylase
immunoreactive neurons and axons in the rat medial geniculate body [published erratum appears in J. Comp. Neurol. 280: 499 –500, 1989]. J. Comp.
Neurol. 278: 47– 68, 1988.
WINER, J. A. AND MOREST, D. K. Axons of the dorsal division of the medial
geniculate body of the cat: a study with the rapid Golgi method. J. Comp.
Neurol. 224: 344 –370, 1984.
WINER, J. A. AND MOREST, D. K. The neuronal architecture of the dorsal
division of the medial geniculate body of the cat. A study with the rapid
Golgi method. J. Comp. Neurol. 221: 1–30, 1983.
WINER, J. A., SAINT MARIE, R. L., LARUE, D. T., AND OLIVER, D. L. GABAergic feedforward projections from the inferior colliculus to the medial
geniculate body. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93: 8005– 8010, 1996.
YAN, J. AND SUGA, N. Corticofugal modulation of time-domain processing of
biosonar information in bats. Science 273: 1100 –1103, 1996.
ZHANG, Y. AND SUGA, N. Corticofugal amplification of subcortical responses to
single tone stimuli in the mustached bat. J. Neurophysiol. 78: 3489 –3492,
1997.
ZHANG, Y., SUGA, N., AND YAN, J. Corticofugal modulation of frequency
processing in bat auditory system. Nature 387: 900 –903, 1997.

