JOURNALOFNEUROPHYSIOLOGY
Vol. 72, No. 2, August 1994. Printed in C’.S.A.

A Model of Spindle Rhythmicity in the Isolated Thalamic
Reticular Nucleus
A. DESTEXHE,

D. CONTRERAS,

T. J. SEJNOWSKI,

AND

M. STERIADE

The Howard Hughes A4edical Institute and The Salk Institute, Computational Neurobiology Laboratory, 10010North
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037; Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, California
92110; and Laboratoire de Neurophysiologie, Faculte de Mdecine, Universite Laval, Quebec GlK 7P4, Canada
SUMMARY

AND

CONCLUSIONS

1. The oscillatory properties of the isolated reticular (RE) thalamus were modeled with the use of compartmental
models of RE
cells. Hodgkin-Huxley
type kinetic models of ionic channels were
derived from voltage- and current-clamp
data from RE cells. Interactions between interconnected
RE cells were simulated with
the use of a kinetic model of y-aminobutyric
acid (GABA) inhibitory synapses.
2. The intrinsic bursting properties of RE cells in the model
were due to the presence of a low-threshold
Ca2+ current and two
Ca2+-activated currents. The properties of these model RE cells
were compared with RE neurons recorded intracellularly
in vivo
in cats.
3. Model RE cells densely interconnected
with GABA,
synapses produced synchronous oscillations at a frequency close to
that of spindles (7- 14 Hz). Networks of RE neurons organized in a
two-dimensional
array with only proximal connectivity also exhibited synchronized oscillations in the spindle range. In addition, the
proximally
connected network showed periods of high and low
synchronicity, giving rise to waxing and waning oscillations in the
population
of RE cells.
4. The spatiotemporal
behavior of the network was investigated during waxing and waning oscillations. The waxing and
waning emerged as an alternation between periods of desynchronized and synchronized activity, corresponding
to periods of irregular and coherent spatial activity. During synchronized periods, the
network displayed propagating
coherent waves of synchronous
activity that had a tendency to form spirals.
5. Networks of model RE neurons fully connected through
GABA, synapses exhibited perfectly synchronous oscillations at
lower frequencies (OS- 1 Hz), but two-dimensional
networks with
proximal GABA, connectivity
failed to synchronize.
6. These simulations demonstrate that networks of model neurons that include the main intrinsic currents found in RE cells can
generate waxing and waning oscillatory activity similar to the
spindle rhythmicity
observed in the isolated RE nucleus in vivo.
The model reveals the interplay between the intrinsic rhythmic
properties of RE cells and the fast synaptic interactions in organizing synchronized rhythmicity.
INTRODUCTION

Spindle waves are waxing and waning 7- to 14-Hz oscillations commonly observed during the early phase of sleep.
They have been shown to occur in most cortical territories
(Andersen and Andersson 1968). Because spindle rhythmicity survives in thalamic nuclei after decortication (Morison and Bassett 1945), the thalamus is believed to generate
these synchronized oscillations. Further experiments performed in cats in vivo showed that cortically projecting tha0022-3077/94

$3.00

Copyright

0

lamic nuclei loose their ability of generating spindle oscillations if they are deprived of input from the reticular thalamic (RE) neurons (Steriade et al. 1985) and that the isolated
RE nucleus can itself generate spindle rhythmicity (Steriade
et al. 1987).
Recently, spindle oscillations were also reported from
ferret slices that contained both thalamocortical (TC) and
RE neurons as well as their reciprocal connections (von
Krosigk et al. 1993). This in vitro preparation allowed the
synaptic components involved in the genesis of spindles to
be investigated. The synchronized oscillations generated in
vitro were shown to depend critically on the integrity of
synaptic interactions between both types of cells (von Krosigk et al. 1993).
The intrinsic properties of TC and RE cells are also important for the genesis of thalamic rhythms (Steriade and
Llinas 1988). Both types of cells possess a low-threshold
Ca2’ current (IT), whose activation and inactivation kinetics have been characterized (Coulter et al. 1989; Huguenard and Prince 1992). In TC cells, it has been proposed
that the interaction between IT and a hyperpolarization-activated inward current (1J may be responsible for the generation of slow oscillations in the 0.5 to ~-HZ delta range
(McCormick and Pape 1990; Soltesz et al. 199 1). Such
oscillatory behavior has also been found in computer models of TC cells (Destexhe et al. 1993a; Lytton and Sejnowski
1992; McCormick and Huguenard 1992; Toth and Crunelli
1992).
Rodent RE neurons display rhythmic oscillations at
7- 12 Hz after injection of current steps (Avanzini et al.
1989; Bal and McCormick 1993). They typically produce a
few bursts followed by a short tonic tail before returning
back to resting level. It has been suggested that this behavior
arises from the interaction between IT and two Ca2+-activated currents, a K+ current (1k& and a nonspecific cation current (1&, both with slow kinetics (Bal and McCormick 1993).
In a recent series of papers (Destexhe and Babloyantz
1993; Destexhe et al. 1993a-c, 1994a,b), computer models
were developed to test the hypothesis that the known intrinsic properties of TC and RE cells, combined with their synaptic interaction, are sufficient to account for the characteristic properties of in vivo and in vitro spindle oscillations. In
particular, a two-neuron model (Destexhe et al. 1993~) accounted for the generation of 8- to lo-Hz spindling from
interacting TC and RE neurons, as observed in ferret slices
in vitro (von Krosigk et al. 1993). However, this model did

1994 The

American

Physiological

Society

803

804

A. DESTEXHE,

D. CONTRERAS,

T. J. SEJNOWSIU,

not account for the observation of spindle rhythmicity in
the deafferented RE nucleus (Steriade et al. 1987), because
the GABAergic interactions between RE cells were not considered.
Previous network models of RE cells used minimal ionic
models of the RE cell (Destexhe and Babloyantz 1992;
Wang and Rinzel 1993), based on the data available at that
time (Avanzini et al. 1989; McCormick and Wang 199 1).
More realistic models of RE cells are now possible, based on
the recent characterization of intrinsic currents in RE cells
(Bal and McCormick 1993) as well as of both types of synaptic GABAergic currents (Otis and Mody 1992; Otis et al.
1993). In this paper we introduce a model of RE cells and
their synaptic interactions and show that an isolated network of such cells, endowed with appropriate intrinsic properties and reciprocal synaptic inhibition, can produce synchronized rhythms similar to spindles observed in the deafferented RE nucleus.

m,(V)
TV

AND

M.

STERIADE

= I/{ 1 + exp[-(
= 0.44

V + 52)/7.4]}

+ O.lS/{exp[(V+

27)/10]

+

exp[-(V+

h,(v) = I/{ 1 + ev[( V + W/51)
Th(V) = 22.7 + 0.27/{exp[(

V + 48)/4] + exp[-(

V + 407)/5O]}

These values correspond to a temperature of 36°C assuming Q,,
values of 5 and 3 (Coulter et al. 1989) and an extracellular Ca2+
concentration of 2 mM.

Ca2+-dependent K+ current: Imcal
Both in vivo (Contreras et al. 1993; Mulle et al. 1986) and in
vitro recordings (Avanzini et al. 1989) show the presence of a
marked afterhyperpolarization (AHP) after each burst of the RE
cell. This slow AHP is mediated by a slow Ca2+-dependent K+
current (Bal and McCormick 1993). We adopted a modified version of a model of lkica] introduced previously (Yamada et al.
1989) that requires the binding of y2Ca2’ to open the channel
(closed)

+

n Cal+ =a (open)

(3)

B

METHODS

Each RE thalamic cell was modeled by single compartment
with a surface area of 1,000 pm2 and Hodgkin-Huxley type of
kinetics for the intrinsic currents.
The equations used for describing the time evolution of the
membrane potential were
crnv = -a( v - EL) - IT - IryCa]- ICAN- INa- k - IGABA (0
where Vis the membrane potential of the RE cell, Cm = 1 pF/cm2
is the specific capacity of the membrane, EL = -78 mV is the
leakage reversal potential, and gL = 0.05 mS/cm2 is the leakage
conductance. The input resistance of this single-compartment cell
is of 2,000 Mfi. IT is the low-threshold Ca2+current, IK[ca and IcAN
are Ca2+-activated currents, INa and Ik are the fast Na -Fand K+
currents responsible for the generation of action potentials, and
loABAis the synaptic current corresponding to GABAergic synapses.
Although other currents were observed in RE neurons, we can
account for most salient features of the dynamics of these cells
with the use of the restricted set of currents described here. In this
section we describe the models used for these currents.

Low-threshold

Ca2’ current: IT

RE thalamic neurons have a rebound burst response, mediated
by a low-threshold Ca2+ current (Avanzini et al. 1989; Bal and
McCormick 1993), similar to that found in thalamocortical neurons. The characterization of this current by voltage-clamp methods in RE cells (Huguenard and Prince 1992) showed that the
kinetics were slower than in TC cells. The model for this current
was
I,=&,m2h(Vtic--

Eta)

1

7 (13 [m - %AVl
m

&-

+p-h,(Vl

(2)

h

where & = 1.75 mS/cm2 is the maximum value of the conductance of the Ca2+ current, ,?& is the Ca2+reversal potential, given
by the Nernst relation (seebelow), and m and h are, respectively,
the activation and inactivation variables. The activation function
and time constants were obtained from experimental data (J. Huguenard, personal communication)

102)/15]}

where Cq,+ is the intracellular calcium and cyand p are rate constants. The ionic current is then given by
I K[Cal

= EK[ca] m2 ( v -

)fj=-.-

~

1

7m([Cali)

m

[m - m,([wi)l

(4)

where &]ca] = 10 mS/cm2 is the maximal conductance, EK = -95
mV is the reversal potential, m is the activation variable of IKIca]
(related to the relative concentration of open channels), [Cal, is the
intracellular calcium concentration, and the Ca2+-dependent
functions are given by
m,(Dli> = 4Wi”l(&all

+ P)

Tm([Cali)= l/CaLCall+ PI
The rate constants are assumed to be independent of voltage so the
activation of lkiCa]therefore depends solely on intracellular Ca2+.
The values y2= 2, CY= 48 ms-’ mMw2 and p = 0.03 ms-’ yielded
AHPs very similar to those RE cells recorded in vivo and in vitro.

Ca2+-dependent nonspecijk cation current: ICAN
Pharmacological studies of RE cells in vitro (Bal and McCormick 1993) have revealed an afterdepolarization (ADP) mediated
by a nonspecific cation current, activated by intracellular calcium,
called IcAN. This current, encountered in many other cells in the
nervous system (Partridge and Swandulla 1988), is voltage independent in most cases.Because there are no data for the voltage
dependence of IcANin RE neurons, we assumed the same activation scheme as for I k[Ca](see above), but with slower kinetics
(5)
LN = &4N n--l2
( v - &!4iv~
where gCAN= 0.25 mS/cm2 is the maximal conductance and &AN
= -20 mV is the reversal potential. The values n = 2, cy= 20 ms-’
mMm2 and p = 0.002 ms-’ yielded ADPs very similar to those
recorded in vitro (Fig. 2B).

Fast Na+ and K+ currents: INa and IK
The fast spikes in RE cellswere modeled with the use of conventional Hodgkin-Huxley kinetics (Hodgkin and Huxley 1952) for
the sodium current (Na and the delayed rectifier rK. The kinetics
were taken from a model of hippocampal pyramidal cells (Traub
and Miles 199 1), and the parameters used for the two currents
were as follows: maximal conductances of gNa = 100 mS/cm2 and

MODEL

OF RETICULAR

THALAMIC

& = 10 mS/cm2, and the sodium reversal potential was of 50 mV.
Fast calcium currents may also contribute to the genesisof the fast
spike, but this was not taken into account in our model.

Synaptic currents IGABA
Synaptic currents were modeled by a kinetic scheme of binding
of transmitter to postsynaptic receptors (Destexhe et al. 1994a,b),
similar in spirit to the models of active currents. The simplest
possible kinetic scheme for such a process is
a
(closed) + T = (open)
B

(6)

where the transmitter molecule T binds to a closed form of the
postsynaptic receptor, yielding to an open form, and a! and p are
the forward and backward rate constants for transmitter binding.
Let Yrepresent the fraction of bound receptors, then
dr
= a [TJ (1 - r) - pr
dt

-

(7)

where [ 7’j is the concentration of transmitter.
This model was implemented by delivering a pulse of transmitter concentration when a presynaptic spike occurred. A pulse of
[ rJ was delivered to Eq. 7 when the presynaptic voltage crossed 0
mV. The inhibitory synaptic current was then given by
km* = GLml( v - J%u3*)
(8)
where gGABA
is the maximal synaptic conductance and EGABA
is the
reversal potential.
RE neurons typically produce bursts of action potentials that
cause summated postsynaptic potentials (PSPs).This kinetic description of the PSP provides a biophysically plausible mechanism
for handling the summation of PSPsbetween neurons producing
spikes (Destexhe et al. 1994b), which is a faster and more easily
implemented alternative to a previously proposed kinetic model
(Perkel et al. 198 1). Moreover, under the hypothesis that the time
course of transmitter release T occurs as a pulse of fixed duration,
the first-order equation can be solved analytically (Destexhe et al.
1994a,b). This yields an exact expression for the PSP and allows
the computation to be performed highly efficiently.
The kinetics of the y-aminobutyric acid (GABA) synapseswere
fit to whole-cell currents obtained from hippocampal neurons
(Otis and Mody 1992) for GABA, receptors. The GABA, reversal
potential has been estimated to be -94 t 8.3 (SE) mV in rat TC
cells (J. Huguenard, personal communication) and around -75
mV in guinea pig RE cells (Bal and McCormick 1993). In our
model of the GABA* current, the reversal potential was -80 mV,
the pulse of transmitter was 1 mM in amplitude and 1 ms in
duration, and the rate constants were a~= 0.53 ms-’ mM-’ and p
= 0.184 ms-’ (see RESULTS and Fig. 4B).
For GABAB synapses, the binding of the receptor activates a
G-protein, which opens a K+ channel (Gage 1992; VanDongen et
al. 1988). In this scheme the opening of the K+ channel is slow
compared with the time course of G-protein activation. If we let T
represent G-protein activity rather than transmitter concentration, and assume that it occurs as a pulse, then the same kinetic
description can be applied to GABA, synapses.Fitting this kinetic
scheme to whole-cell currents obtained from hippocampal neurons (Otis et al. 1993) yielded a value of 1 PM for the pulse amplitude, a pulse duration of 85 ms, and rate constants of Q!= 0.0 16
ms-’ PM-’ and p = 0.0047 ms-’ (seeRESULTS and Fig. 12A). The
reversal potential was -95 mV, according to values estimated
from rat TC cells(- 103 ? 8 mV) (J. Huguenard, personal communication) and guinea pig RE cells (-94 to -97 mV) (Bal and
McCormick 1993).
Such a kinetic description can be used as well with more realistic
kinetic schemesyielding an expression of the postsynaptic current,

OSCILLATIONS

805

which contains several components in the time course of decay
(Destexhe et al. 1994b). Although the fit to the experimental recordings was better, we decided to use the first-order kinetic model
for synaptic currents for simplicity and speed of simulation.
We investigated networks ranging in size from N = 2 to N =
1,600 RE neurons. To maintain comparable input currents as the
number of synapseswas varied, we resealed the synaptic conductances so that the sum of the maximal conductances that could be
activated at all efferent synapsesfrom a single RE neuron was 1 PS
for GABA, synapses and 0.01 PS for GABAB synapses. These
values produced the typical behaviors of the networks reported
here.

Intracellular

calcium dynamics

The dynamics of intracellular Ca2’ was modeled by a fast removal processd ue to an active pump, and Ca2+entry is due to the
Ca2+ current I, as described previously in a model of the TC cell
(Destexhe et al. 1993a). The influx of Ca2+ into a thin shell beneath the membrane followed
.
k
[Cal, = - -2&j IT
(9)
where F = 96,489 C mol-’ is the Faraday constant, d = 1 pm is
the depth of the shell beneath the membrane, and the unit conversion constant is k = 0.1 for 1= in PA/cm2 and [Cali in millimolar.
The contribution of the Ca2+pump was
.
&ICali
(10)
[Ca1i= - [Cai] + &
l

where KT = 10e4 mM/ms-’ and Kd = 10q4 mM are the rate constants obtained from a Michaelis-Menten approximation of the
kinetics of the pump (Destexhe et al. 1993a). These time constants
were chosen to obtain fast removal of the submembranal calcium,
in the millisecond range (see Destexhe et al. 1993a).
The Ca2+ reversal potential strongly depends on the intracellular Ca2+concentration and was calculated according to the Nernst
relation

where R = 8.31441 J mol-’ ‘IS-‘, T = 309.15”K, and the constant for unit conversion is K = 1,000 for Eta in millivolts. For
[Cali = 2.4 10m4mM and [Cal, = 2 mM, which are typical values
at rest in the simulations presented here, EC, was - 120 mV.
l

Network of RE cells
A network of N RE cells was modeled by

where vi is the membrane potential of neuron i (i = 1 . N), the
sum runs over all neuronsj sending a connection to neuron i,fx vi)
represents the intrinsic currents to cell i (fi = 1T + Iwcal + ICAN +
&, + 1k). The synaptic current is given by
l

l

where the variable r( vi) is the activity of the synapse and depends
on presynaptic activity (vj) as described above.
The neurons were arranged on a two-dimensional square lattice
(fix fw with uniform connectivity: the same pattern of connectivity was used for each neuron in the network, and all values of
synaptic conductances were identical. Several types of connectivity were considered. The simplest caseis the “nearest-neighbor”
connectivity in which every cell connects to its four immediate
neighbors. The most frequently used connectivity is here the
“dense proximal” coupling in which every neuron connects to all

806

A.

DESTEXHE,

D. CONTRERAS,

T. J. SEJNOWSKI,

other neurons within some radius. Finally, we also used “fully
connected” networks, sometimes called “all-to-all” connectivity,
in which every cell connects to the whole array of cells in the
network.
The connections near the boundaries of the square array were
reflected back into the array to minimize boundary effects. That
is, a connection to a neuron that lies outside the array was instead
connected to the mirror image of that neuron in the array. This
allowed every neuron in the network to receive the same number
of synapses,therefore minimizing finite size effects.
In the network, all neurons were initially set at their resting
membrane potential, which was around -70 mV. Because RE
neurons only display bursts in response to an external stimulus, a
network of RE cells will remain silent unless an external perturbation occurs. Oscillatory behavior was elicited by injecting a random hyperpolarizing pulse in each neuron, during the first 2 s of
the simulation. These pulses had lOO-msduration and amplitudes
uniformly distributed between 0 and 0.05 nA, and they occurred
at latencies uniformly distributed between 0 and 2 s. After the
perturbation given by these pulses during the first 2 s, the network
developed a self-sustained oscillatory activity (see RESULTS).
The average membrane potential was evaluated with the use of

W)
where the sum runs over a subset of N’ cells taken in the network
(N’ I N). For N = 100, all cells were averaged (N’ = N), but for
larger networks, a local average was performed by chasing a disk of
N’ = 113 cells in the center of the network.
The variable (v> represents the averaged value of membrane
potentials in the network and is a useful indicator of synchronized
activity. This variable can be compared with field potentials recorded in the isolated RE nucleus. Although the origin of the field
potentials is still not clearly established, it is likely that they result
from a spatial summation of current sources (Nunez 198 1). In a
network of single compartment neurons, the estimates of the field
potentials derived from current sources and from average membrane potential follow very similar time courses (Destexhe and
Babloyantz 1992).
The average membrane potential (I’), is sensitive to synchronous activity in the network. We define a “synchronous” state as
one in which several neurons, but not necessarily all, oscillate in
phase. Note that neurons involved in a synchronized oscillation
need not produce spikes, because subthreshold oscillations of
membrane potentials also contribute to (I$ Systems in which all
cells oscillate in phase are described here as “perfectly synchronized.”

Parameters and simulations
The conductance values and reversal potentials were generally
estimated from published values provided by measurements in
vitro. All kinetic data were scaledto a temperature of 36°C and an
extracellular Ca2+concentration of 2 mM. However, the data only
provide approximate values for the parameters.
The values of the parameters also depended on the geometry of
the model of the RE cells, which did not include dendrites. In
more geometrically accurate models of these cells, different parameter values might be needed to achieve the same performance of
the model neuron.
The results are presented here for a typical set of parameter
values and are robust to variation of the kinetic parameters for
synaptic interactions, the values of the conductances of the
various currents, and the architecture of the system. The simulations presented here therefore display the generic properties of the
system.
All simulations were performed with the use of NEURON

AND

M.

STERIADE

(Hines 1993) on a Sun Spark 10 workstation. The typical time
taken for simulating 1 s of a network of 100 RE neurons with 25
GABA, synapseseach was 960 CPU s. The simulation time scaled
approximately with the number of neurons and the number of
synapsesin the network.

Intracellular

recordings

In vivo intracellular recordings were performed on cats anesthetized with ketamine-xylazine or barbiturates. Cells were located in
the rostrolateral sector of the RE nucleus and were identified by
their response to internal capsule stimulation, which consisted of
an initial high-frequency burst followed by depolarizing spindle
oscillation (see Contreras et al. 1993).
RESULTS

We start with the intrinsic properties of single RE neurons, which are fit to voltage-clamp and current-clamp
data, and investigate networks of RE neurons of increasing
complexity interconnected by either GABA, or GABAB
synapses.
Intrinsic properties of RE neurons
Intracellular recordings of RE cells performed in vitro
(Avanzini et al. 1989; Bal and McCormick 1993) demonstrated that a rebound sequence of rhythmic bursts can be
elicited in the RE cell after current injection. This behavior
was resistant to tetrodotoxin (TTX) (Bal and McCormick
1993) and was therefore intrinsic to the cell. An AHP after
the burst was necessary for this oscillation to occur, because
apamin, which is a blocker of lkLcal, abolished the rhythmic
activity.
Rhythmic bursting activity at a frequency of 8-12 Hz
occurred spontaneously, or followed internal capsule or
thalamic stimulation, in intracellular recordings of cat RE
cells in vivo (Fig. 1). Typically, this oscillatory behavior
accompanied a depolarizing envelope and led to a tonic tail
of spike activity (Domich et al. 1986).
Modeling studies have shown that the combination of
the currents 1T and lkICal robustly generates oscillations
(Destexhe et al. 1993~; Wang and Rinzel 1993) at low frequency (2-4 Hz), as shown in Fig 2A. These oscillations
occurred as a rebound rhythmic bursting activity in response to a hyperpolarizing pulse. The 2- to ~-HZ frequency
was mainly dependent on the level of the resting potential,
and of the kinetics of IT and lkLcal. Despite the ease with
which these low-frequency oscillations could be generated,
none of the kinetic parameters tested for lkIcal were able to
produce frequencies in the range 7-14 Hz.
Another outward current, IcAN, present in RE cells (Bal
and McCormick 1993), produces a marked ADP after application of TTX and apamin. In the model, such an ADP
can be produced in the presence of IT and IcAN in rebound
to an hyperpolarizing pulse (Fig. 2B). The kinetic scheme
used for describing ICAN was not voltage dependent (see
METHODS).

Simulations of a single compartment containing the combination of currents IT, IKLcal,and IcAN are shown in Fig. 2,
Cand D. The model cell produced a rebound bursting activity at a frequency of 9- 11 Hz. The activation of I,,,accelerated the rising phase of the burst and increased the fre-

MODEL

OF RETICULAR

quency of the rebound burst sequence. The presence of IcAN
also terminated the oscillatory behavior by producing a
tonic tail of spikes before the membrane returned to its
resting level. The relative values of gflc,] and gCANmodulated both the frequency and the relative importance of
rhythmic bursting relative to tonic tail activity (compare
Fig. 2, C and D). The tonic tail was always characterized by
an initial increase of spike frequency followed by a decrease. Such an accelerando-decelerando pattern of spikes
has been described in bursts of RE neurons in vivo (Contreras et al. 1993; Domich et al. 1986).

THALAMIC

OSCILLATIONS
A

//I

40mV
250ms

250ms

/i

!

\

1
,/I

C

Oscillatory behavior in simple circuits with GABAA
synapses
Intracellular recordings of inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) mediated by GABAA receptors in cat RE cells
have been reported in vivo (Fig. 3). GABA, IPSPs were also
found in RE neurons from ferret slices in vitro (von Krosigk
et al. 1993). The effectiveness of GABA, agonists on RE
neurons was reported previously (Bal and McCormick
FIG. 2. Intrinsic rebo und burst properties of single RE neurons in the
model. Rebound bursts were evoked by injection of a hyperpolarizing
pulse (arrow). A: rhythmic bursting following the interaction between I,
and IK(ca] &xv = 0). B: afterdepolarization (ADP) in the model cell with
only I, and IcAN present (&, = 0, &,, = 0, &AN = 0.25 mS/cm2). C: same
simulation in the presence of all currents, with lktCal dominating (gCAN=
0.25 mS/cm2). The cell produced a few bursts at higher frequency and
terminated with a short tonic tail of spikes. D: same simulation as in C, but
with ICANdominating (gCAN= 2 mS/cm2). The tonic tail activity is more
prominent. All hyperpolarizing pulses were 2 pA (0.2 pA/cm2) amplitude
and 100 ms duration. Same calibration for A, C, and D; for all traces, the
initial voltage was of -70 mV.

-7OmV

-75mV
0.2

s

-76mV
0.3

s

1. Eight- to 12-Hz bursting properties of cat reticular thalamic
(RE) neurons in vivo. Sequences of rhythmic bursts appear in RE cells
spontaneously or evoked by electrical stimulation of the internal capsule.
During spindle oscillations RE cells display spikes bursts at 8- 12 Hz riding
on a depolarizing envelope. Top panel (Evoked): 2 different responses to
electrical stimulation of the internal capsule in a RE cell from the rostrolatera1 sector. The cell is progressively hyperpolarized by DC current injection. For the more depolarized membrane potential, the cell displays a
tonic tail of spikes. Bottom panel (Spontaneous): spontaneous spindle sequence in a different RE cell.
FIG.

1993; McCormick and Prince 1986; Spreafico et al. 1988)
and were shown to have specific actions in the RE nucleus
(Huguenard and Prince 1993). These lines of evidence suggest that synaptic interactions between RE cells are at least
partially mediated by GABAA receptors.
A first-order kinetic model of an inhibitory synapse (see
METHODS) was fit to digitized recordings of GABA* postsynaptic currents obtained from whole-cell recordings in
granule cells of rat dentate gyrus (Otis and Mody 1992).
Figure 4A compares the model of the synaptic current with
the experimental data. Figure 4B shows the corresponding
IPSP used for the model RE cell.
The first step in modeling the behavior of RE neurons
interconnected with GABAA synapses was to study two interconnected neurons (Fig. 5). The strengths of the mutual
inhibition was adjusted to produce inhibition sufficiently
strong to produce oscillations. Two types of oscillatory behavior were observed depending on the pattern of connectivity of the two cells. In the absence of inhibitory self-connections (Fig. 5A), the two model RE cells produced alternating multiple bursts. The first cell (cell 1) produced a
series of bursts in the range 9-l 1 Hz, which induced a sequence of IPSPs in the companion cell (cell 2). These IPSPs
deinactivated IT in cell 2 and, when the bursts in cell 1
stopped, the release of the inhibition induced a series of
bursts in cell 2. This cycle continued indefinitely with a
repetition rate of - 1 Hz. Between the periods of rhythmic

808

A. DESTEXHE,

D. CONTRERAS,

T. J. SEJNOWSKI,

AND M. STERIADE

A

“’

I

I

I
-7OmV

-76mV

C

D
OnA

1

I‘i

OnA
--InA

0r

FIG. 3. y-Aminobutyric
acid-A (GABA,) inhibitory synaptic potentials in RE cells in vivo.
RE cells occasionally display short-lasting inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs). A and B: an
intracellular recording from a RE cell from the
rostrolateral sector shows spontaneous short-lasting IPSPs (*), lasting 20-40 ms. C and D: IPSPs
were reverted by injection of hyperpolarizing
current (indicated by * and - - -).

-1 nA
0.2

8

-------d
-60

mV

-95

mV

burst firing, the membrane was hyperpolarized below the
range of IT activation, therefore preventing IAHp and IcAN
from activating because Ca2+ entry could not occur.
In the following, we define as “Type 1 oscillations” multiple burst activity in which at least two groups of cells produce sequences of bursts in alternation, separated by periods where the membrane is hyperpolarized. This is a common type of oscillatory mechanism for neurons coupled
with mutual inhibition (see DISCUSSION).
A very similar

oscillatory behavior was also described by Golomb and
Rinzel (1994) for mutually inhibiting cells.
In the presence of self-inhibitory connections, another
type of oscillatory behavior was seen (Fig. 5B). Cell 2 produced a single burst that terminated the bursting in cell 1
and inhibited cell 2. A rebound burst was produced in celZ2,
and the cycle repeated at a frequency of around 6.5 Hz.
During the interburst period, the hyperpolarized membrane potential prevented IT, IAHP, and ZcANfrom activating. Single cells with an auto-GABA, synapse do not oscillate (not shown). Although many combinations of parame-

10pA

4mV
50 ms

4. Kinetic-based model of GABA, inhibitory synaptic potentials
in RE cells. A: best fit obtained from the kinetic model of synaptic conductances (smooth curve), compared with GABA, currents obtained from
whole-cell recordings in granule cells of rat dentate gyrus (noisy trace)
(from Otis and Mody 1992). The model was fit to the data with the use of a
least-squares procedure. B: corresponding GABA, IPSP obtained from the
model with a maximal conductance of gGABA= 25 nS.
FIG.

0.5 s
FIG. 5. Oscillatory behavior of 2 interconnected RE cells with GABA,
synapses. Diagram of connectivity is shown on the left, and traces from
simulations of the 2 neurons are shown on the right. A: reciprocal interactions produce Type 1 oscillation. B: addition of self-connections produces
Type 2 oscillation. gcABA= 1 PS (A) and 0.5 PS (B). Vertical calibration bars
are from - 100 to -50 mV.

MODEL

OF RETICULAR

THALAMIC

809

OSCILLATIONS

membrane potential of the five cells at -6.5
they never fired in unison.
Oscillatory behavior in two-dimensional
GABA, synapses
B

n

200 mv

D
n

0.5 s
6. Oscillatory behavior of systems of 5 RE neurons with GABA,
synapses. The patterns of connectivity are shown on the left, and the corresponding traces from the 5 neurons are shown on the right. A and B: the
connectivity is to nearest neighbors along a circle. C and D: full reciprocal
connectivity was used. Neurons in B and D have self-connections. Vertical
calibration bars are 100 mV. gdABA = 0.5 pS (A), 0.33 pS (B), 0.25 pS (C),
and 0.2 PS (D).
FIG.

ter values were tested, synchronous bursting activity was
never observed. This suggests that synchronous bursting
might not exist in homogeneous systems of RE neurons
with GABA* synapses.
In the following, we define as “Type 2 oscillations” single
burst activity in which the whole system shows a phaselocked subthreshold oscillation, but individual cells fire
bursts only occasionally. In the case shown in Fig. 5B, the
Type 2 oscillations are periodic, and each of the two cells
fires a single burst of spikes in alternation.
The two-neuron system is a simple model for two populations of RE neurons. Within each population the neurons
oscillate in phase, and the two populations as a group
oscillate out-of-phase. This will be demonstrated in simulations of systems with 5 and 100 RE neurons coupled with
GABA, synapses.
Figure 6 shows the oscillatory behavior for various types
of connectivity in a system of five RE neurons. In a network
with only nearest neighbors connected, an alternating multiple burst activity is seen similar to the Type 1 oscillations
(Figure 64. However, the five neurons did not alternate in
two populations, but burst sequentially in an ordered pattern. In particular, neurons that were separated from each
other by one intervening neuron tended to fire in pairs, with
one following the other after a single burst. The configurations with nearest-neighbor with auto-synapses (Fig. 6B)
and full connectivity (Fig. 6, C and D) produced an oscillatory mode that was similar to the Type 2 oscillations seen in
the two-cell model. There was a marked synchrony of the

Hz, although

networks with

We investigated the dynamics of a system of 100 RE neurons whose connectivity was organized in a two-dimensional array, which better approximates the organization of
the RE than full connectivity. The simplest type of connectivity in such a system is the nearest-neighbor configuration
shown in Fig. 7A. This topology of the GABAA synapses
favored alternating multiple burst activity in neighboring
neurons (Fig. 7B), which was similar to the Type 1 oscillations described in the two-neuron model. In addition, there
was a tendency for waves of bursting activity to sweep
across the network (Fig. 7B). The average membrane potential of the network did not show any evidence of
synchrony (Fig. 7C).
A more realistic pattern of connectivity for RE neurons is
“dense proximal connectivity”
in which a given neuron
connects to all other neurons within some radius, as shown
in Fig. 8A. With connections from 25 neighboring neurons
including an auto-synapse, the activity of the network
showed a complex, oscillatory dynamics at a frequency of
6.5-9 Hz (Fig. 8B). There was little evidence of alternating
multiple burst activity, and the dynamics of the oscillation
were similar to the Type 2 oscillation observed in the twoand five-neuron models.
The main difference, however, was that the network with
dense proximal connectivity produced a more disordered

A

0000000000
0 ~00000000
0
0 ~000~00000
0 oo~mooo 0
0 ocma@ooo0
0 00c3@3000
0
0 00000000 0
0 000000000
0 000000000

0000000000

C

FIG. 7. Oscillatory behavior of a network of 100 RE neurons with nearest-neighbor GABA, connections. A: pattern of connectivity: a given RE
neuron (black) connects to 4 immediately adjacent RE cells (dark gray). B:
activity of the 10 cells along the diagonal of the network (vertical calibration bar is of 200 mV). C: average value of the membrane potentials of all
100 RE neurons during the same simulation as in B (vertical calibration
bar is from -90 to -80 mV). gGABA= 0.25 $3.

810

A. DESTEXHE,

D. CONTRERAS,

T. J. SEJNOWSKI,

AND M. STERIADE

the range within approximatively
here. Here again, a qualitatively
obtained.

A

+50% of the values given
equivalent behavior was

Spatiotemporaldynamics of two-dimensionalnetworks
with GABA* synapses
We explore here the spatiotemporal patterns that give
rise to the spindle rhythmicity observed in the two-dimensional network model. The properties of the model that
determine the waxing and waning behavior are of special
interest.
The dynamic behavior of the network exhibited ordered
spatial as well as temporal patterns of activity. Snapshots of
the activity in the two-dimensional array were constructed
by assigning a gray level to the value of the membrane potential of each RE neuron. A succession of such frames,
played as a movie, allowed coherent patterns of activity to
be tracked in the population of neurons. Examination of
C
Fig. 9 for a network with 100 neurons reveals that, at any
given moment, all neurons that were firing in phase form a
coherent patch, or “wave.” As time evolved, this wave of
synchronous activity moved around the network, forming
2s
traveling patterns. This suggests that the spindle rhythmicFIG. 8. Oscillatory behavior of a network of 100 RE neurons with
dense proximal GABA, connections. A: pattern of connectivity: a given
ity observed in the average firing activity of neurons in the
RE neuron (black) connects with 24 other RE cells (dark gray) and itself. B: network is a reflection of coherent waves of activity that
activity of the 10 cells along the diagonal of the network (vertical calibrarecur on every cycle of the oscillation (Fig. 9).
tion bar is 200 mV). C: average value of the membrane potentials of the
Networks with 400 neurons were similar in their behav100 RE neurons during the same simulation as in B. Vertical calibration
ior
to networks with 100 neurons, although the patterns
bar for the membrane potentials is from -90 to -80 mV). &aA = 0.04 P.S.
were more complex. Figure 10 shows the spatiotemporal
dynamics. The average membrane potential showed wax- patterns of activity in a network of 400 RE neurons with
ing and waning patterns of oscillatory activity (Fig. 8C),
which corresponded to alternating periods of synchronization and desynchronization of the activity of the RE cells

1

(seeSpatiotemporaldynamicsoftwo-dimensionalnetworks
with GABA, synapses).This pattern of average activity was
consistent with the waxing and waning patterns of field potentials recorded in the RE nucleus after deafferentation
(Steriade et al. 1987).
This waxing and waning of the average potential with a
period of several seconds was observed for a large range of
connectivity patterns; virtually all connection patterns except nearest neighbors and full connectivity gave waxing
and waning Type 2 oscillations. The same type of oscillations was also observed in networks of various sizes (simulations were performed up to N = 1,600 networks). This type
of oscillation represents the prototypical behavior of a twodimensional network of RE neurons with GABA, synapses.
Other parameters such as the conductances and the kinetics of synaptic interactions were also varied. We found
that, although blocking ZUN greatly affects the firing patterns of the isolated RE cell, it has not a marked effect on
the network behavior. Type 2 waxing and waning oscillations also occurred with ZCANeither completely blocked, or
at a higher value (such as in Fig. 20). Similarly, different
sets of values for the kinetic constants of the IPSPs were
tested (see, for example, slower values used in Destexhe et
al. 1993~) and did not affect qualitatively the behavior of
the system. Finally, the conductances of the different
currents, including synaptic conductances, were tested in

FIG. 9. Spatial activity of the 100 neuron network during waxing and
waning oscillations. Same connectivity as in Fig. 8. Each square frame
represents the activity of the 100 neurons, arranged in a 10 X 10 array. The
value of the membrane potential for each neuron is shown as a gray scale
ranging in 10 steps from -90 mV (white) to -60 mV (black). Membrane
potentials higher than -60 mV are shown in black. Each frame is labeled
by the time at which the snapshot was taken (time is in ms from the
beginning of the simulation; time step between frames is 20 ms). The
averaged activity of the network during the same period of time is shown at
the bottom. Vertical calibration bar for the average membrane potential is
from -80 to -70 mV.

MODEL

OF RETICULAR

dense proximal connectivity that produced waxing and
waning Type 2 oscillations. The network displayed spatial
patterns of propagating activity in the form of a clockwise
rotating wave (Fig. 10).
Comparison of these snapshots with the averaged voltage
and single cell traces of Fig. 8 reveals that the periodicity of
the waves of activity, 1 lo- 150 ms, corresponds closely to
the oscillations observed in the averaged voltage (6.5-9 Hz).
For N = 400, the period of these oscillations was 120-140
ms (assuming that the spirallike wave is symmetrical),
which is in the 6.5- to 9-Hz spindle range. The traveling
wave of activity involved every cell in the network, but the
oscillation was subthreshold, only occasionally giving rise
to a burst of spikes, as indicated by black squares in Figs. 9
and 10. Thus, although the average activity was dominated
by the subthreshold 6.5- to g-Hz oscillation, single cells
fired irregularly, once every two or three cycles.
Waxing and waning has a longer time scale, lasting for
several seconds, and is manifested in the spatiotemporal
pattern as coherent waves that form and dissolve. The activity of neurons in the network alternated between periods of
coherent oscillatory activity, characterized by well defined
traveling waves, and periods of less coherent activity, in
which the pattern of spatiotemporal activity was less organized (Fig. 11A).
As the size of the system increased, the spatiotemporal.
patterns became more complex (Fig. lo), but traveling
waves persisted with about the same wavelength. For large
networks (N = 400, N = 1,600), domains formed within the
spatial array that oscillated independently, giving rise to an
average activity over the entire network that was weaker in
amplitude because the phases tended to cancel out (not
shown). However, local domains of - 100 neurons in a
large network showed waxing and waning patterns very sim-

THALAMIC

OSCILLATIONS

811

*:m
M]
N=400

(1

N=lHXl

#

]
2s

FIG. 11. Spatiotemporal patterns giving rise to waxing and waning activity. A: snapshots of activity in a 100 neuron network during waxing and
waning oscillations corresponding to the regions of the averaged membrane potential indicated. Top series of snapshots was taken during the
“desynchronized” phase and shows highly irregular spatiotemporal behavior. Bottom series of snapshots was taken during the “oscillatory” phase,
when the network is more synchronized and coherent oscillations are
found in the averaged activity. The time interval between frames was 40
ms. B: averaged membrane potentials for networks with N = 100, N = 400,
and N = 1,600 neurons. For N = 400 and N = 1,600, the local average
membrane potential was obtained by averaging over a disk of 113 neurons
in the center of the network. All simulations were performed under conditions identical to those in Fig. 8. Vertical calibration bars for the average
membrane potential traces are from -80 to -70 mV.

ilar to those observed in N = 100 networks (Fig. 11 B). Thus
the waxing and waning patterns exhibited in small networks (Fig. 8) may be closely related to similar patterns
observed within the domains of larger networks. This is
important in comparing our models with the much larger
network of neurons found in RE, because the field potential
recorded from RE in vivo is probably a local average of
- 100 nearby neurons (see DISCUSSION).

Oscillatorybehaviorin thepresenceof GABAs synapses

FIG. 10. Spatial activity of a 400 neuron network during waxing and
waning oscillations. Same description as in Fig. 9 with nearest-neighbor
connectivity and self-connections. In this case a clockwise rotating pattern
of activity is seen transiently, as well as patterns similar to Fig. 9. Steps
between frames are 10 ms, and the averaged activity was evaluated from an
averaging over a disk of 113 neurons centered in the network.

Application of GABA, antagonists has an insignificant
effect on spindle oscillations in vitro, suggesting that
GABAB receptors are not essential to these oscillations (von
Krosigk et al. 1993). However, a very weak GABAB component was seen in RE neurons (D. A. McCormick, personal
communication).
Indirect evidences also suggest a prominent GABA, IPSP with a much weaker GABA, component (Huguenard and Prince 1993). Although there is no
evidence for purely GABA, synapses between RE cells, a
modeling study has suggested that the 7- to 1~-HZ rhythmicity could result from slow inhibition between RE cells
(Wang and Rinzell993). In this section we explored simulations of RE neurons interacting by slow inhibition.
The first-order kinetic model of the synapse was adjusted

812

A. DESTEXHE,

D. CONTRERAS,

T. J. SEJNOWSKI,

B

FIG. 12. Model of the GABA, IPSP. A: best fit obtained from the kinetic-based model of synaptic currents (smooth curve), compared with
GABA, currents obtained from whole-cell recordings in granule cells of rat
dentate gyrus (noisy trace) (from Otis et al. 1993). The model was fit to the
data with the use of a least-squares procedure. B: corresponding GABAB
IPSP obtained from the model with a maximal conductance of gGABA=
0.25 nS.

by fitting the model to digitized recordings of GABA, postsynaptic currents obtained from whole-cell recordings in
granule cells of rat dentate gyrus (Otis et al. 1993). We assumed that GABA,-mediated
postsynaptic currents of RE
cells are of similar time course as in dentate granule cells.
Data are not yet available for RE cells, but preliminary data
indicate that GABAB currents of TC cells have a time
course comparable with that of dentate granule cells (J. Huguenard, personal communication).
Figure 12A shows the
best fit obtained by such a procedure, and the corresponding IPSP obtained by simulation of the RE cell is shown in
Fig. 12B.To yield IPSPs comparable in amplitude with the
GABA,-mediated
IPSPs, the maximal conductance of the
GABA, current was set IOO-fold lower to compensate for
the longer duration of the GABA, current.
We explored the two-neuron model with GABA, synapses to compare it with our previous study of mutual
GABA, inhibition. This simple system also allowed us to
characterize the types of oscillatory behavior observed in
more complex networks.
Two types of oscillations were observed (Fig. 13). In the
absence of GABAB self-connections (Fig. 13A), there was
an alternating multiple burst activity, very similar to the
Type 1 oscillation of Fig. 5A. However, the IPSP produced
by the sequence of bursts is longer lasting, and the period of
the oscillation, -3 s, is much longer. In the presence of
self-inhibitory connections, a new type of oscillatory behavior was observed (Fig. 13B). The two cells oscillated in
perfect synchrony at a frequency of 0.5-l Hz. Variations
of the conductances values of all currents present in the
system failed to produce oscillation at a frequency higher
than -2 Hz.
Unlike a single neuron with an auto-GABA, synapse,
which does not oscillate, a single neuron with an autoGABA, synapse displays oscillatory behavior (not sh.own).

AND M. STERIADE

This shows that a perfectly synchronized solution is possible in a system of RE neurons with GABA, synapses. In the
following we define such perfectly synchronized oscillation
as “Type 3 oscillation.”
We also investigated networks with five neurons, similar
to those shown in Fig. 6 (not shown here). Type 1 oscillation only occurred for nearest-neighbor connectivity, as in
Fig. 6A. Type 3 oscillations are only seen for full connectivity, in which each neuron connects to every other neuron
(as in Fig. 6, C and D). The other types of connectivities
gave asynchronous oscillations.
In a two-dimensional
array of RE neurons interacting
with GABAB synapses, the dynamics appeared to be much
less synchronous than in the case of GABA* interactions.
Networks with nearest-neighbor connections displayed a
Type 1 oscillation (not shown) similar to what was observed
for GABA*. The output from a network with dense proximal connections is shown in Fig. 14. Unlike the same configuration with GABA* synapses (Fig. 8), only a few cells
became synchronized, although a very slow oscillatory tendency was observed in the average value of the membrane
potential (Fig. 14C’). Typically, a majority of cells were hyperpolarized by GABAB IPSPs for a long time (several seconds), occasionally producing a rebound burst. At any
given time most of the cells are silent, as shown by the
average membrane potential, which rarely goes above -80
mV (by comparison, in the case of GABA, networks, the
average potential oscillated around -75 mV). “Clusters” of
perfectly synchronous cells (2-5) were sometimes seen.
This behavior is similar to that found in another model
(Golomb and Rinzel 1993); however, these clusters were
not static and recurred randomly.
For a large range of parameters values, including different schemes of connectivity, different values for the conductances, and the decay rates of IPSPs, we could not observe synchronized rhythmicity for proximally connected
A

1
1
B

n

FIG. 13. Oscillatory behavior of 2 interconnected RE cells with GABA, synapses. Identical configuration and parameters as Fig. 5, but with
slow inhibitory synapses. A: reciprocal inhibitory connections produced
Type 1 oscillations. B: reciprocal and self-connections produced Type 3
oscillations that were highly synchronized. gGABA= 10 nS (A) and 5 nS (B).
Vertical calibration bars for the membrane potentials are from - 100 to
-50 mV.

MODEL

OF RETICULAR

A

THALAMIC

OSCILLATIONS

813

(Steriade et al. 1990), suggest that the intrinsic properties of
RE neurons and mutual inhibitory interactions between
them may generate such rhythms. Our model of the isolated RE nucleus confirms this hypothesis and provides
constraints on possible mechanisms that may be responsible for the rhythmicity.
Our approach has been to start with realistic models for
the currents found in RE neurons, based on Hodgkin-Huxley type of kinetics and plausible biophysical schemes. We
considered only single compartment models that neglected
dendritic contributions, which may be significant in shaping the bursting behavior observed in these neurons (see
Contreras et al. 1993). The patterns of connectivity of the
networks that were explored were always uniform and limited in extent. Nonetheless, the behaviors exhibited were
generic and already present in the simplest two-neuron
model. In our investigation we explored both the contributions of the synaptic interactions and intrinsic properties of
the RE neurons to the generation of spindle rhythmicity
(see also Destexhe et al. 1993b,c; Steriade et al. 1993).

C

0.5s
FIG. 14. Oscillatory behavior of a network of 100 RE neurons with
dense proximal GABA, connections. Identical configuration and parameters as Fig. 8, but with slow inhibitory synapses. A: pattern of connectivity:
a given RE neuron (black) connects to immediately adjacent RE cells (dark
gray) including an auto-synapse. B: activity of the 10 cells along the diagonal of the network (vertical calibration bar is 200 mV). C average value of
the membrane potentials of all 100 RE neurons during the same simulation as in B. Vertical calibration bar for the membrane potential is from
-90 to -80 mV. sCABA= 0.4 nS.

networks of RE neurons with GABA* synapses. For networks with a high degree of connectivity, there is no synchronization unless all neurons are connected. For example, synchrony was not observed in a N = 400 network in
which each neuron received inputs from 18 1 neighboring
neurons, or 45% connectivity. However, Type 3 slow synchronized oscillations were observed in N = 100 networks
with full connectivity, in which every neuron sends a connection to all other neurons in the network (not shown).
DISCUSSION

Bridging the gap between the intrinsic properties of neurons and the behavior of networks formed from these neurons is a difficult problem. The highly nonlinear properties
of most of the neurons in the CNS (Llinas 1988) makes the
dynamics exhibited by even simple networks highly complex. This is especially the case for thalamic neurons and
networks within the thalamus. On the other hand, the thalamus has relatively simple anatomy compared with cortical
circuits, and there is hope that some progress can be made
with the use of modeling techniques based on physiological
and anatomic data.
Even when deprived from all afferents, neurons in the
thalamic RE nucleus display a waxing and waning type of
rhythmicity at a frequency of 7- 16 Hz (Steriade et al. 1987).
This finding, along with the particular intrinsic properties
of RE cells (Avanzini et al. 1989; Bal and McCormick
1993), and the inhibitory nature of intra-RE connections

Intrinsic properties of RE neurons and kinetics of
GABAergic synapses
Previous models of RE cells, based on simplified ionic
conductance models, showed that the combination of IT
and IK[Ca] is very robust in generating oscillations (Wang
and Rinzel 1993). We observe the same general behavior
here with different models of these two currents, based on
more recent data from voltage-clamp and current-clamp
experiments. In addition, the presence of IcAN increased the
frequency of the oscillation and terminated the sequence of
bursts into a tonic tail of spikes, as observed in vitro (Avanzini et al. 1989; Bal and McCormick 1993) and in vitro
(Contreras et al. 1993). At the single cell level, the model
presented here shows that relatively simple kinetic schemes
of the lkiCal and ICAN channels activated by intracellular
Ca2+ can account for the production of rhythmic bursts
terminated by a tonic tail of spikes. At the network level,
the behavior was insensitive to the details of the intrinsic
properties of RE cells, provided they could produce rebound bursting activity.
The present model of synaptic conductance change is
based on the kinetics of postsynaptic channels (Destexhe et
al. 1994a,b). A kinetic model of synaptic conductances can
be fitted to experimental voltage-clamp data (as shown in
Figs. 4 and 12) and provides a natural way to integrate successive PSPs (Destexhe et al. 1994b). This is particularly
useful for modeling thalamic neurons, which typically fire
bursts of spikes during oscillatory states. A kinetic model of
synaptic conductance changes has already been used to
study the properties of 8- to lo-Hz spindling in interconnected thalamic relay and RE cells (Destexhe et al.
1993b,c).
Preliminary electrophysiological data indicate that the
synaptic interaction between RE neurons is predominantly
through GABA, receptors (Fig. 3), with a weaker GABAB
component. In this paper a first-order kinetic scheme for
the GABA, and GABA, receptors was shown to be computationally very efficient, while reproducing the main fea-

814

A.

DESTEXHE,

D.

CONTRERAS,

T. J. SEJNOWSKI,

tures of the kinetic properties of the corresponding synaptic
currents.
Mechanisms for synchronous oscillations between RE
neurons
Networks of inhibitory neurons exhibiting postinhibitory
rebound have been used to model central pattern generators in motor systems (Perkel and Mulloney 1974). In our
model of rhythmicity in the RE nucleus, which was also
based on interacting inhibitory neurons, rhythmic activity
occurred in the network even though none of the cells exhibited sustained oscillations. Similar behavior is observed in
small networks of inhibitory neurons in the stomatogastric
ganglion of the lobster (Rowat and Selverston 1993).
Simplified network models specific to the RE nucleus
have already been explored (Destexhe and Babloyantz
1992; Wang and Rinzel 1992, 1993). In these cases the synaptic interaction was modeled with the use of sigmoid-type
of coupling, which assumed a smooth transformation between the presynaptic voltage and the postsynaptic conductance in the synapse. One of these models (Wang and Rinzel 1992, 1993) demonstrated the presence of synchronized
oscillations if the decay of the synaptic current was sufficiently slow. Another model (Destexhe and Babloyantz
1992) showed that synchronized rhythms could be observed if the connectivity between neurons was not restricted to immediate neighbors, but rather to a more extended population of neighboring cells.
We have approached the problem of interpreting largescale network simulation by first examining a two-neuron
model, which already exhibited some of the oscillatory behaviors found in larger networks. The additional complexity introduced by the topology of the network was explored
by varying the pattern of connectivity.
Type 1 oscillations, first found in the two-neuron model,
is the “alternating multiple burst” activity in which the two
cells produce a sequence of rhythmic bursts in alternation.
This oscillation was present for both GABA, and GABAB
synapses in the two-neuron model as well as in the 5 and
100 cell networks. This type of oscillation was found when
cells were only connected to their nearest neighbors and not
to themselves.
Type 2 oscillations occurred only in the presence of
GABA, synapses in networks with dense proximal connectivity. For both the two-neuron model and the network,
there is a synchronized oscillation of the membrane potential at a frequency of -6.5-9 Hz. Although the membrane
potentials oscillate in phase, the cells have a tendency to fire
in alternation. Type 2 oscillations were the most common
type of oscillation observed in networks with GABA, synapses and connectivity extending beyond the nearest neighbors.
Type 3 oscillations occurred in the presence of GABAB
interaction with full connectivity. Like Type 2 oscillations,
Type 3 oscillations were characterized by a high degree of
synchrony between the model cells. However, during Type
3 oscillations, RE cells displayed a perfectly synchronized
periodic bursting behavior; the frequency was much lower
(0.5-l Hz) than for GABA, Type 2 oscillation (6.5-9 Hz).
Finally, the Type 3 oscillations were sensitive to the archi-

AND

M.

STERIADE

tecture of the network and were only found for full reciprocal connectivity.
Perfect synchronization between two inhibitory neurons
is only possible if the inhibition outlasts the rebound burst
(Wang and Rinzel 1992). In the case of Type 3 oscillations,
the GABAB current peaks at - 100 ms after the onset of the
presynaptic spike (Otis et al. 1993). Our results therefore
provide further support that two neurons reciprocally connected with this type of synapse can develop a perfectly
synchronized oscillation.
Type 3 oscillations probably correspond to the oscillatory
behavior observed in another model (Wang and Rinzel
1992, 1993), which exhibited perfect synchrony and required slow inhibition.
The oscillatory phenomena reported here were typically of the “release” variety as defined by Wang and Rinzel ( 1992), for which the time course
of inhibition determines the oscillatory period of the system. However, in the present case, the frequency did not
depend simply on the time course of inhibition, but rather
on the balance between IPSPs and other intrinsic currents,
such as &HP (not shown).
In our model of the RE cell, we were not able to find
parameter values that produced Type 3 oscillations in the
range of spindle frequencies (7- 14 Hz) because of the slow
decay of the GABAB IPSP that prevented the cell from producing a rebound burst for nearly 1 s after the IPSP. The
decay time constant of our GABA, currents is -200 ms,
which is of the same order as the value used by Wang and
Rinzel (1992, 1993). The same behavior at a higher frequency was observed if GABAB synapses had faster decay
time constants or lower conductances (not shown). It is
possible that neither the Wang-Rinzel model nor ours has
the correct parameters for the slow GABAB currents, because there are at present no data on isolated GABAB
currents in RE nucleus available to help constrain the
models.
A possible candidate for spindle rhythmicity

Comparing the properties of these three basic oscillatory
modes with those of the RE nucleus, we suggest that the
GABA, (Type 2) oscillation is the best candidate for the
spindle rhythmicity observed in the isolated RE nucleus.
CONNECTIVITY.
Anatomic studies of the RE nucleus show
that RE cells are connected through GABAergic dendrodendritic synapses, except for rodents (Deschenes et al.
1985; Yen et al. 1985). In addition, the axons emanating
from RE cells give rise to collaterals in the RE nucleus before projecting to relay nuclei (Jones 1985; Yen et al. 1985).
Because these collaterals probably extend over larger distances than the size of the dendritic tree, it is expected that a
given RE cell receives inputs from cells outside its immediate neighborhood. This observation makes Type 1 and
Type 3 oscillations unlikely candidates for spindle rhythmicity, because they rely on conditions of connectivity that
are not found in the RE: that RE cells are only connected to
their immediate neighbors for Type 1 oscillations or that all
RE cells are reciprocally connected for Type 3 oscillations.
Type 2 oscillations were not found for nearest-neighbors
connectivity (except if self-connections were added), neither for full GABA, connectivitv. Virtuallv all other con-

MODEL

OF

RETICULAR

nections schemes gave rise to waxing and waning Type 2
oscillations, with or without autosynapses. The only requisite is that every neuron receives input from a neighborhood sufficiently extended (more than the nearest-neighbors) but still smaller than the size of the network.
In all simulations the frequencies of waxing
FREQUENCY.
and waning Type 2 oscillations were always in the range
6-9 Hz. The frequency depended on the decay time constant of GABA, IPSPs, as well as other parameters. When
GABA, postsynaptic currents are modeled with a slow time
course, the frequencies of the network oscillations are necessarily very slow (0.5-l Hz), much slower than the actual
7- 16 Hz frequency of rhythmical oscillation in the isolated
RE nucleus (Steriade et al. 1987). This would rule out Type
3 oscillations.
TIME COURSE
OF IPSPs.
From in vivo intracellular recordings of the spontaneous oscillatory activity of RE cells in
anesthetized cats (n = 70), only the presence of fast IPSPs
has been revealed in somatic impalements (Fig. 3) (Contreras and Steriade, unpublished data). Fast IPSPs were also
directly observed in RE cells recorded in vitro and were
thought to arise from neighboring RE cells (von Krosigk et
al. 1993). Pharmacological evidence for the existence of
GABA, receptors in RE neurons is strong (Bal and McCormick 1993; Huguenard and Prince 1993; McCormick and
Prince 1986; Spreafico et al. 1988; von Krosigk et al. 1993).
ROBUSTNESS.
Among the three types of oscillations, Type
2 were the most frequently observed. Unlike Type 3 oscillations, which were sensitive to the details of the architecture
of the network, Type 2 oscillations were remarkably robust.
They occurred for a variety of sizes and architectures of the
network (provided the connectivity was sufficiently extended), for different values of the conductances and different kinetics of IPSPs. They were also insensitive to the parameters characterizing the intrinsic properties of the RE
cells, such as the dominant tonic tail activity controlled by
I CAN (as in Fig. 20). We expect that Type 2 collective oscillatory behavior will persist in more realistic models of the
RE nucleus. We also suspect that some unusual properties
of Type 2 oscillations, such as the spatiotemporal wave phenomena, may also be found in simpler models, such as that
of Destexhe and Babloyantz (1992) and Wang and Rinzel
(1992, 1993), which did not include spikes but depended
instead on a synaptic activation function that depended
smoothly on the presynaptic membrane potential.
Spatiotemporal correlates of waxing and waning
oscillations
In our network models the waxing and waning observed
in the population activity was a consequence of averaging
over spatiotemporal patterns of activity. Before suggesting
that something similar may be happening in the RE, we
must consider the genesis of the spatiotemporal phenomena, possible boundary effects due to finite size, and how
the size of the network may influence the spatiotemporal
patterns.
The spatiotemporal phenomena underlying waxing and
waning oscillations in the network are irregular propagating
waves of activity that sometimes show spirallike patterns.
Within the wave, a subset of the neurons burst synchro-

THALAMIC

OSCILLATIONS

815

nously. Although the overall activity of every cell in the
network is aperiodic, synchronization takes place, rather
remarkably, through coherent structures that are apparent
only at the network level. The waxing and waning emerges
as the number of synchronized cells progressively increases,
then decreases.
Several lines of evidence lead to the conclusion that
boundary conditions are not important in the genesis of
these spatiotemporal phenomena. First, local field potentials obtained by averaging a subset of cells in the center of a
large network show the same waxing and waning patterns
as observed in smaller networks. This suggests that the
borders of the network do not dominate the dynamics, probably because neurons on the border have the same number
of synaptic connections as neurons in the interior and traveling waves are absorbed rather than reflected (see Figs. 9
and 10). Second, other types of boundary conditions were
tested, such as periodic boundary conditions, and produced
the same qualitative behavior.
It is possible that new phenomena could emerge as the
size of the network is increased. The main evidence against
this possibility is that the typical wavelength of propagating
waves remained constant as the number of neurons in the
model was increased 16-fold. Even though the activity averaged over the entire network diminished with the size of the
network, waxing and waning was still observed within
smaller clusters of neurons with undiminished amplitude.
We found that groups of - 100 neighboring neurons in a iV
= 400 or N = 1,600 network showed waxing and waning
patterns very similar to the averaged potential of the N =
100 network. This suggests that similar phenomena take
place in networks of different sizes.
There is evidence that some regions of the RE are not
homogeneous, as we have assumed in our model. Steriade
et al. (1987) have reported that the field potentials from the
RE recorded in vivo can display waxing and waning oscillations at one location but be silent if the electrode is slightly
displaced to a neighboring location in the RE. During a
single-electrode penetration, several clusters of spindle
rhythmicity were encountered separated by quiescent regions. This may be related to anatomic data showing that
the RE nucleus is organized in a nonhomogeneous fashion
(Jones 1985). Although the density of neurons in most regions of the RE is relatively low, in the rostra1 pole of the RE
nucleus, the dendrites are organized in tightly packed bundles (Scheibel and Scheibel 1972). These data suggest that a
relatively small number of RE neurons, perhaps no more
than a few dozen, can generate the field potentials observed
in the RE nucleus with extracellular microelectrodes. If this
is valid, then the small sizes of the networks we have studied
here may in fact match the relevant scale for collective phenomena occurring in the RE.
In the present model we have not incorporated the inhomogeneities of connectivity in the RE nucleus because precise data are not yet available. We suggest, however, that the
N= 100 network is prototypical of a cluster of RE cells
producing waxing and waning oscillations. If we assume
further that a small population of - 100 neurons contributes to the local field potentials that have been reported,
then the model suggests that the same mechanisms may
underlie waxing and waning in larger homogeneous net-

816

A. DESTEXHE,

D.

CONTRERAS,

T. J. SEJNOWSKI,

works. We therefore predict that spindle rhythmicity in the
RE is a collective effect that arises in a population of tens to
a hundred RE neurons with dense proximal connections.
Mechanisms of thalamic oscillations
Our network model of RE neurons with reciprocal inhibition has revealed several mechanisms that provide insights
into the origin of the rhythmic spindling that has been observed in the RE nucleus.
First, the model of RE thalamic neurons produced rhythmicity in the spindle range with the use of plausible intrinsic properties, synaptic kinetics, and patterns of interconnectivity. Several features of the model were important for
generating this rhythmicity: first, the RE cells needed to
have an intrinsic ability to generate rebound bursts; second,
the GABAergic inhibitory interactions between RE cells
needed to be fast; and, third, the interconnectivity
must
reach beyond the nearest-neighbor neurons and include inputs from neurons covering an extended region.
Second, the waxing and waning observed in the simulations was a population phenomenon. In the model the waxing and waning was produced by the alternation of partially
synchronized periods of oscillatory behavior with desynchronized periods. Therefore a waxing and waning type
of oscillation in the average membrane potential of neurons
in the network does not necessarily correspond to waxing
and waning patterns in single cells (Fig. 8). The model predicts that the isolated RE nucleus should produce a waxing
and waning pattern due to a population phenomenon and
that the intracellular recordings made in isolated RE nucleus should reveal an important difference with spindles in
intact preparation. Unlike waxing and waning of spindle
oscillations in the intact thalamocortical system that have
been observed in the membrane potentials of single neurons (Steriade and Llinas 1988; von Krosigk et al. 1993),
the waxing and waning of the spindles in the isolated RE
nucleus has not been recorded intracellularly. The population spindling observed in the model is nonetheless consistent with the waxing and waning observed in single units
and field potentials recordings of the isolated RE nucleus in
vivo (Steriade et al. 1987).
Third, the present model addressed the contributions of
synaptic inhibition and connectivity in a network of RE
cells without dendrites and demonstrates that dendritic interactions are not strictly necessary for generating spindle
rhythmicity. However, dendrites may still be involved in
generating and modulating the rhythmicity, as suggested
previously (Deschenes et al. 1985). Intracellular recordings
of RE neurons in vivo provide evidence that dendrites may
contain some of the active currents that are involved in
spindling behavior (Contreras et al. 1993). Such dendrites
with active currents and reciprocal inhibitory synapses constitute potentially a multitude of local oscillators in the dendritic tree. This opens a wide range of possible mechanisms
of interaction that should be addressed by a more realistic
model.
Transformation of spindles into epileptic oscillations
Numerous clinical, electrophysiological, and pharmacological studies suggest that some type of ge neralized spikeand-wave epilepsy could be a perversion of spindle oscilla-

AND

M.

STERIADE

tions (see Avoli et al. 1990 for a review; see also Steriade et
al. 1993). Antagonists of the GABAB receptor were found
effective in preventing the development of spike-and-wave
discharges in animal models (Hosford et al. 1992; Liu et al.
1992), suggesting that GABA, receptors are critically involved in the cellular mechanisms of this rhythmicity. This
hypothesis was further supported by recent experiments in
thalamic slices in vitro, which reported the transformation
of spindle oscillations into slower and more synchronized
oscillations in the presence of GABA, antagonists (von
Krosigk et al. 1993). These slow oscillations were abolished
by GABA, antagonists, confirming that they were generated by mechanisms involving GABA, receptors. Recent
experiments (Huguenard and Prince 1993) further showed
that clonazepam, an antiabsence drug, reduced GABA,
IPSPs in TC cells through actions in the RE nucleus, preventing the development of the “GABA, synchrony.”
In the present model we observed a perfectly synchronized slow oscillation (Type 3) in the presence of GABA,
synapses for systems with full connectivity. However, we
could not observe this type of perfectly synchronized oscillations with realistic connectivity. This is nonetheless in
agreement with the absence of epileptic oscillations in the
isolated RE nucleus in vivo (Steriade, unpublished observations). The RE nucleus alone may be unable to develop
epileptic behavior: we suggest that TC-RE interactions are
necessary to account for this pathology. Consistent with
this hypothesis, a shift from spindle oscillation to 2.5- to
3.5-Hz oscillations was observed in a simplified model of
TC-RE interaction when the IPSP decay time constant was
slowed from 10 to 300 ms (Destexhe et al. 1993~). Models
of interconnected networks of TC and RE cells are needed
to explore the role of GABA, in transforming spindles into
spike-and-wave discharges.
Interactions

of RE cells with thalamocortical

cells

Experiments performed in ferret slices (von Krosigk et al.
1993) showed that the spindle oscillations observed in vitro
depended on the integrity of the synaptic connections between TC and RE cells. Our present model of the RE may
help to explain why spindle rhythmicity was not observed
in vitro when the RE was isolated from the TC. We have
shown that a high degree of connectivity must be present
between the RE cells before there is sufficient interaction to
produce Type 2 oscillations. The loss of lateral inhibitory
interactions in the slice may reduce the connectivity below
the minimum required (Steriade et al. 1993). This can be
tested by recording from thicker slices or organ cultures of
the thalamus.
In a model of interconnected TC and RE cells, spindles
were shown to occur as a result of the interaction between
the intrinsic properties of TC and RE cells (Destexhe et al.
1993b,c). In the model the waxing and waning pattern was
generated primarily by the TC cell, whereas the 8- to IO-Hz
frequency was due to the intrinsic oscillatory properties of
RE cells and the kinetics of inhibition in synapses from RE
to TC cells. An understanding for how spindling is organized in the thalamus will require an integration of the present network model of the RE nucleus with the model of

MODEL

OF RETICULAR

TC-RE interactions. Interactions between the thalamus
and the cortex should also be included (Lytton et al. 1992).
Although we do not yet have a complete picture of spindl .e rhythmicity in the thalamus, the existing data together
with our models suggest a working hypothesis. Both in vivo
(Buzsaki et al. 1988; Pare et al. 1987; Steriade et al. 1985)
and in vitro (von Krosigk et al. 1993) experiments show
that no sp indlin .g can be observed in TC cells that are severed from their connections with the RE nucleus. In vivo
experiments (Steriade et al. 1987) demonstrated the presence of spindle rhythmicity in the deafferented RE nucleus,
suggesting an RE origin of this rhythmic activity. However,
that study also suggested that, in the intact brain, TC neurons may drive RE cells and shape spindle rhythmicity, as is
now indicated by in vitro data (von Krosigk et al. 1993).
The generation of spindles may therefore depend both on
mechanisms intrinsic to the RE nucleus and on the interactions between RE and TC cells. The investigation of the
spatial and temporal properties of the spindle oscillations
that emerge from these interactions shoul .d benefit from
more accurate and more complete m .odels.
NEURON programs that simulate the models of this article, as well as
movies showing the propagating wave activity, are available on request or
by anonymous ftp to SALKEDU in /pub/slain.
We acknowledge Drs. J. Huguenard, T. Otis, and I. Mody for use of
data. After submitting this manuscript we received a paper by D. Golomb,
X. J. Wang, and J. Rinzel (unpublished) on oscillatory behavior in fully
connected networks of RE neurons that is in agreement with our model.
We also thank the authors for useful comments on our paper that improved the present manuscript.
This research was supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute
and the Medical Research Council of Canada.
Address for reprint requests: The Howard Hughes Medical Institute and
The Salk Institute, Computational Neurobiology Lab., 100 10 North
Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, CA 92037.
Received 9 December 1993; accepted in final form 30 March 1994.
REFERENCES
P. AND ANDERSSON, S. A. The Physiological Basis oftheAIpha
Rhythm. New York: Appelton Century Crofts, 1968.
AVANZINI,
G., DE CURTIS, M., PANZICA, F., AND SPREAFICO, R. Intrinsic
properties of nucleus reticular-is thalami neurones of the rat studied in
vitro. J. Physiol. Lond. 4 16: 111-122, 1989.
AVOLI, M., GLOOR, P., KOSTOPOULOS,
G., AND NAQUET, R. (Editors).
Generalized Epilepsy. Boston, MA: Birkhaiiser, 1990.
BAL, T. AND MCCORMICK,
D. A. Mechanisms of oscillatory activity in
guinea-pig nucleus reticularis thalami in vitro: a mammalian pacemaker. J. Physiol. Land. 468: 669-69 1, 1993.
BUZSAKI, G., BICKFORD,
R. G., PONOMAREFF,
G., THAL, L. J., MANDEL,
R., AND GAGE, F. H. Nucleus basalis and thalamic control of neocortical
activity in the freely moving rat. J. Neurosci. 8: 4007-4026, 1988.
CONTRERAS,
D., CURRY DOSSI, R., AND STERIADE, M. Electrophysiological properties of cat reticular thalamic neurones in vivo. J. Physiol.
Land. 470: 273-294, 1993.
COULTER, D. A., HUGUENARD,
J. R., AND PRINCE, D. A. Calcium currents
in rat thalamocortical relay neurones: kinetic properties of the transient,
low-threshold current. J. Physiol. Lond. 4 14: 587-604, 1989.
DESCHENES, M., MADARIAGA-D~MICH,
A., AND STERIADE, M. Dendrodendritic synapses in the cat reticularis thalami nucleus: a structural
basis for thalamic spindle synchronization. Brain Res. 334: 165- 168,
1985.
DESTEXHE, A. AND BABLOYANTZ,
A. Cortical coherent activity induced by
thalamic oscillations. In: Neural Network Dynamics, edited by J. G.
Taylor, E. R. Caianello, R. M. J. Cotter-ill, and J. W. Clark. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1992, p. 234-249.
DESTEXHE, A. AND BABLOYANTZ,
A. A model of the inward current 1hand
its possible role in thalamocortical oscillations. NeuroReport 4: 223226, 1993.
ANDERSEN,

THALAMIC

OSCILLATIONS

817

A., BABLOYANTZ,
A., AND SEJNOWSIU, T. J. Ionic mechanisms
for intrinsic slow oscillations in thalamic relay neurons. Biophys. J. 65:
1538-1552, 1993a.
DESTEXHE,
A., LYTTON, W. W., SEJNOWSKI, T. J., MCCORMICK,
D. A.,
CONTRERAS,
D., AND STERIADE, M. A model of 7-14 Hz spindling in
the thalamus and thalamic reticular nucleus: interaction between intrinsic and network properties. Sot. Neurosci. Abstr. 19: 5 16, 1993b.
DESTEXHE, A., MAINEN, Z., AND SETNOWSKI, T. J. An efficient method for
computing synaptic conductances based on a kinetic model of receptor
binding. Neural Computation 6: 14- 18, 1994a.
DESTEXHE, A., MAINEN, Z., AND SEJNOWSKI, T. J. Synthesis of models for
excitable membranes, synaptic transmission and neuromodulation using a common kinetic formalism. J. Computational Neurosci. 1994b. In
press.
DESTEXHE, A., MCCORMICK,
D. A., AND SEJNOWSKI, T. J. A model for
8- 10 Hz spindling in interconnected thalamic relay and reticular-is neurons. Biophys. J. 65: 2474-2478, 1993~.
DOMICH,
L., OAKSON, G., AND STERIADE, M. Thalamic burst patterns in
the naturally sleeping cat: a comparison between cortically projecting
and reticularis neurones. J. Physiol. Lond. 379: 429-449, 1986.
GAGE, P. W. Activation and modulation of neuronal K+ channels by
GABA. Trends Neurosci. 15: 46-5 1, 1992.
GOLOMB,
D. AND RINZEL, J. Dynamics of globally coupled inhibitory neurons with heterogeneity. Phys. Rev. E 48: 48 lo-48 14, 1993.
GOLOMB,
D. AND RINZEL, J. Clustering in globally coupled inhibitory
neurons. Physica D. 72: 259-282, 1994.
HINES, M. NEURON-A
program for simulation of nerve equations. In:
Neural Systems: Analysis and Modeling, edited by F. Eeckman. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1993, p. 127-136.
HODGKIN,
A. L. AND HUXLEY, A. F. A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve.
J. Physiol. Lond. 117: 500-544, 1952.
HOSFORD,
D. A., CLARK, S., CAO, Z., WILSON, W. A., JR., LIN, F. H.,
MORRISETT,
R. A., AND HUIN, A. The role of GABA, receptor activation in absence seizures of lethargic ( 1h/ 1h) mice. Science Wash. DC
257: 398-40 1, 1992.
HUGUENARD,
J. R. AND PRINCE, D. A. A novel T-type current underlies
prolonged Ca2+-dependent bursts firing in GABAergic neurons of rat
thalamic reticular nucleus. J. Neurosci. 12: 3804-38 17, 1992.
HUGUENARD,
J. R. AND PRINCE, D. A. Clonazepam suppresses GABA,
inhibition in relay cells through actions in the reticular nucleus. Sot.
Neurosci. Abstr. 19: 1704, 1993.
JONES, E. G. The Thalamus. New York: Plenum, 1985.
LIU, Z., VERGNES, M., DEPAULIS, A., AND MARESCAUX,
C. Involvement
of intrathalamic GABA, neurotransmission in the control of absence
seizures in the rat. Neuroscience 48: 87-93, 1992.
LLINA~,
R. R. The intrinsic electrophysiological properties of mammalian neurons: a new insight into CNS function. Science Wash. DC 242:
1654-1664, 1988.
LYTTON,
W. W. AND SEJNOWSKI, T. J. Computer model of ethosuximide’s
effect on a thalamic cell. Ann. Neural. 32: 13 l-l 39, 1992.
LYTTON,
W. W., SEJNOWSKI, T. J., AND STERIADE M. Simulated entrainment of thalamocortical cells by repetitive cortical shocks. Sot. Neurosci. Abstr. 18: 305, 1992.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND HUGUENARD,
J. R. A model ofthe electrophysiological properties of thalamocortical relay neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 68:
1384-1400, 1992.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND PAPE, H. C. Properties of a hyperpolarization-activated cation current and its role in rhythmic oscillations in thalamic
relay neurones. J. Physiol. Land. 43 1: 29 l-3 18, 1990.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND PRINCE, D. A. Acetylcholine induces burst firing
in thalamic reticular neurones by activating a potassium conductance.
Nature Lond. 3 19: 402-405, 1986.
MCCORMICK,
D. A. AND WANG, Z. Serotonin and noradrenalin excite
GABAergic neurones of the guinea-pig and cat nucleus reticularis thalami. J. Physiol. Lond. 442: 235-255, 199 1.
MORISON,
R. S. AND BASSETT, D. L. Electrical activity of the thalamus and
basal ganglia in decorticate cats. J. Neurophysiol. 8: 309-3 14, 1945.
MULLE, C., MADARIAGA,
A., AND DESCH~NES, M. Morphology and electrophysiological properties of reticularis thalami neurons in cat: in vivo
study of a thalamic pacemaker. J. Neurosci. 6: 2 134-2 145, 1986.
NUNEZ, P. L. Electric Fields of the Brain. The Neurophysics of EEG. Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ. Press, 198 1.
OTIS, T. S., DEKONINCK,
Y., AND MODY, I. Characterization of synaptiDESTEXHE,

818

A. DESTEXHE,

D. CONTRERAS,

T. J. SEJNOWSISI, AND M. STERIADE

tally elicited GABA, responses using patch-clamp recordings in rat hippocampal slices. J. physiol. Lo&. 463: 39 l-407, 1993.
OTIS, T. S. AND MODY, I. Modulation of decay kinetics and frequency of
GABA,
receptor-mediated
spontaneous inhibitory
postsynaptic
currents in hippocampal neurons. Neuroscience 49: 13-32, 1992.
PAR& D., STERIADE, M., DESCH~NES,
M., AND OAKSON, G. Physiological characteristics of anterior thalamic nuclei, a group devoid of inputs
from reticular thalamic nucleus. J. Neurophysiol. 57: 1669- 1685, 1987.
PARTRIDGE,
L. D. AND SWANDULLA,
D. Calcium-activated non-specific
cation channels. Trends Neurosci. 11: 69-72, 1988.
PERKEL, D. H. AND MULLONEY,
B. Motor pattern production in reciprocally inhibitory neurons exhibiting postinhibitory rebound. Science
Wash. DC 185: 181-183, 1974.
PERKEL, D. H., MULLONEY,
B., AND BUDELLI, R. W. Quantitative methods for predicting neuronal behavior. Neuroscience 6: 823-827, 198 1.
ROWAT, P. F. AND SELVERSTON,
A. I. Modeling the gastric mill central
pattern generator of the lobster with a relaxation-oscillator network. J.
Neurophysiol. 70: 1030-1053, 1993.
SCHEIBEL, M. E. AND SCHEIBEL, A. B. Specialized organization patterns
within the nucleus reticularis thalami of the cat. Exp. Neural. 34: 3 16322, 1972.
SOLTESZ, I., LIGHTOWLER,
S., LERESCHE, N., JASSIK-GERSCHENFELD,
D.,
POLLARD, C. E., AND CRUNELLI,
V. Two inward currents and the transformation of low frequency oscillations of rat and cat thalamocortical
cells. J. Physiol. Lond. 44 1: 175- 197, 199 1.
SPREAFICO, R., DE CURTIS, M., FFUSSONI, C., AND AVANZINI,
G. Electrophysiological characteristics of morphologically identified reticular thalamic neurons from rat slices. Neuroscience 27: 629-638, 1988.
STERIADE, M., DESCH~NES, M., DOMICH,
L., AND MULLE, C. Abolition of
spindle oscillations in thalamic neurons disconnected from nucleus
reticularis thalami. J. Neurophysiol. 54: 1473- 1497, 1985.
STERIADE, M., DOMICH,
L., OAKSON, G., AND DESCH~NES, M. The deaf-

ferented reticular thalamic nucleus generates spindle rhythmicity. J.
Neurophysiol. 57: 260-273, 1987.
STERIADE, M., JONES, E. G., AND LLINA~, R. R. Thalamic Oscillations and
SignalZing. New York: Wiley, 1990.
STERIADE, M. AND LLINA~, R. R. The functional states of the thalamus
and the associated neuronal interplay. Physiol. Rev. 68: 649-742, 1988.
STERIADE, M., MCCORMICK,
D. A., AND SETNOWSKI, T. J. Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused brain. Science Wash. DC
262: 679-685, 1993.
TOTH, T. AND CRIJNELLI,
V. Computer simulations of the pacemaker
oscillations of thalamocortical cells. NeuroReport 3: 65-68, 1992.
TRAUB, R. D. AND MILES, R. Neuronal Networks of the Hippocampus.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, 199 1.
VANDONGEN,
A. M. J., CODINA, J., OLATE, J., MATTERA, R., JOHO, R.,
BIRNBAUMER,
L., AND BROWN, A. M. Newly identified brain potassium
channels gated by the guanine nucleotide binding protein G,. Science
Wash. DC 242: 1433- 1437, 1988.
VON KROSIGK, M., BAL, T., AND MCCORMICK,
D. A. Cellular mechanisms
of a synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. Science Wash. DC 26 1:
361-364, 1993.
WANG, X. J. AND RINZEL,
J. Alternating and synchronous rhythms in
reciprocally inhibitory model neurons. Neural Computation 4: 84-97,
1992.
WANG, X. J. AND RINZEL, J. Spindle rhythmicity in the reticularis thalami
nucleus-synchronization
among inhibitory neurons. Neuroscience 53:
899-904, 1993.
YAMADA,
W. M., KOCH, C., AND ADAMS, P. R. Multiple channels and
calcium dynamics. In: Methods in Neuronal Modeling, edited by C.
Koch and I. Segev. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989, p. 97- 134.
YEN, C. T., CONLEY, M., HENDRY,
S. H., AND JONES, E. G. The morphology of physiologically identified GABAergic neurons in the somatic sensory part of the thalamic reticular nucleus in the cat. J. Neurosci. 5:
2254-2268, 1985.

