JOURNALOF NEUROPHYSIOLOGY
Vol. 57, No. 1, January 1987. Printed

The Deafferented Reticular Thalamic Nucleus
Generates Spindle Rhythmicity
M. STERIADE,

L. DOMICH,

G. OAKSON,

AND

M. DESCHfiNES

Laboratoire de Neurophysiologie,Dbpartementde Physiologic,
Faculte’de Mkdecine, Universite’Laval, QukbecGlK 7P4, Canada

SUMMARY

AND

CONCLUSIONS

1. The hypothesis that nucleus reticularis
thalami (RE) is the generator of spindle rhythmicity during electroencephalogram (EEG)
synchronization was tested in acutely prepared
cats. Unit dischargesand focal waves were extracellularly recorded in the rostra1pole of RE
nucleus, which was completely disconnected
by transections from all other thalamic nuclei.
In some experiments, additional transections
through corona radiata created a triangular island in which the rostra1RE pole survived with
the caudate nucleus, putamen, basalforebrain
nuclei, prepyriform area, and the adjacent
cortex. Similar results were obtained in two
types of experiments: brain stem-transected
preparations that exhibited spontaneous spindle sequences,and animals under ketamine
anesthesiain which transient spindling was
repeatedly precipitated during recording by
very low dosesof a short-acting barbiturate.
2. Both spindle-related rhythms (7- to 16Hz wavesgrouped in sequencesthat recur with
a rhythm of 0.1-0.3 Hz) are seenin focal recordings of the deafferented RE nucleus. The
presence of spindling rhythmicity in the disconnected RE nucleus contrasts with total absenceof spindles in cortical EEG leads and in
thalamic recordings behind the transection.
Oscillations within the same frequency range
asthat of spontaneousspindles can be evoked
in the deafferented RE nucleus by subcortical
white matter stimulation.
3. In deafferented RE cells, the burst structure consistsof an initially biphasic acceleration-deceleration pattern, eventually leading
to a long-lasting tonic tail. Quantitative group
data show that the burst parameters of disconnected RE cells are very similar to those
260

0022-3077/87

of RE neurons with intact connections. In the
deafferented RE nucleus, spike bursts of RE
neurons recur periodically (0.1-0.3 Hz) in
close time-relation with simultaneously recorded focal spindle sequences.The burst occurrence of deafferented RE cells is greatly reduced after systemic administration of bicuculline.
4. The preservation of both spindle-related
rhythms in the disconnected RE nucleus, together with our recent experiments showing
abolition of spindle oscillations in thalamic
nuclei after lesions of RE nucleus (24), demonstrate that RE nucleus is the generator of
spindle rhythms.
INTRODUCTION

Spindle waves are high-voltage electroencephalogram (EEG) oscillations at 7- 14 Hz
that appear during natural statesof decreased
alertness (drowsinessand EEG-synchronized
sleep) and during barbiturate anesthesia. Sequences of EEG spindle waves last for 1.5-2
s and recur periodically with a slow rhythm
of 0.1-0.2 Hz (23). The intrathalamic genesis
of spindleswas first indicated by Morison and
Bassett(14) who recorded these oscillations in
the intralaminar thalamic region after bilateral
decortication and high brainstem transection.
Recent studies in our laboratory provided
two lines of experimental evidence favoring
the hypothesis that nucleus reticular-isthalami
(RE) is the generator of thalamic spindle oscillations. 1) During spindle sequences, RE
neurons exhibit images that are reciprocal to
those of their targets in the dorsolateral thalamus. Whereas the major spindle-related
events in thalamocortical neurons are longlasting hyperpolarizations interrupted occa-

$1 SO Copyright

0 1987 The American

Physiological

Society

RHYTHMICITY

OF DEAFFERENTED

sionally by short spike bursts, RE neurons discharge continuously throughout the whole
spindle sequences during natural sleep (25).
The process that underlies the prolonged RE
discharges during spindles is a slowly growing
and decaying depolarization due to a noninactivating inward current, that is probably

RE NEURONS

261

Na+-dependent (15). Since the rhythmic hyper-polarizations of thalamic relay neurons
mainly consist of inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) (2, 20) and given the GABAergic nature of RE neurons (5), the hypothesis was advanced that the latter elements
generate rhythmic inhibitory events in the

FTC. 1. Disconnection of the rostral pole of reticular (RE) nucleus from other thalamic nuclei. Bilateral thalamic
transections. Horizontal sections at plane + 4, stained with cresyl violet. Oblique arrow in right part of A points to the
same blood clot shown at higher magnification in B, the rectangular box within RE nucleus in B is shown in more
details in C. Horizontal bars in mm. CA, caudate nucleus; MD, VB, and VI, mediodotsal, ventrobasal, and ventrolateral
thalamic nuclei, respectively; PC, posterior commissure; SC, superior colliculus; V3, third ventricle.

262

STERIADE, DOMICH, OAKSON, AND DESCHCNES

former, with the consequence of spreading
spindle waves along thalarnocortical pathways
(23). 2) The hypothesis outlined above is supported by abolition of both spindle-related
rhythms (7-14 Hz and 0.1-0.2 Hz) in thalamic
nuclei that are disconnected from their RE inputs by transections in acutely prepared animals or by kainate-induced lesions of RE neurons in chronic experiments (24). Moreover,
in anterior thalamic nuclei of cat, which are
naturally devoid of RE afferents (27), intra-

cellularly recorded cells do not display spontaneous or evoked spindle oscillations despite
the fact that their intrinsic properties are similar to those of other thalamocortical
neurons (16).
The lack of spindle oscillations in RE-deprived thalamocortical
neurons (24) may be
due to the interruption of loop circuits between
RE and cortically projecting nuclei. Another
possibility, tested and confirmed in the present
study, is that RE neurons are generators of

RG. 2. Disconnection of the rostml pole of reticular (RE) nucleus from its thalamic and cortical inputs. Three
different experiments (A-B, C, and D). Sag&al sections stained with cresyl violet. The rostral pole of RE nucleus is
indicated by arrowheads in A (same part is shown at greater magnification in B) and in C. The section depicted in D
has the same orientation as sections A-C (the hemorrhagic transection is posterior to RE nucleus). See text for description
of structures present in the triangular island shown in A and C. CA, caudate nucleus; IC, internal capsule; PP, pes
pedunculi; PRP, prepyriform cortex; PU, putamen; a. 12, orbital area 12.

RHYTHMICITY

OF DEAFFERENTED

spindle oscillations, with the implication that
both spindle-related rhythms survive in RE
nucleus disconnected from its major (thalamic
and cortical) input sources.

RE NEURONS

263

amine administered intramuscularly
with an initial
dose of 40 mg/kg. Supplementary doses of ketamine
(U-20 mg/kg) were given during the experiments.
Because spindling rhythmicity is not manifest in
the EEG of animals under ketamine, we precipitated
spindle sequences with Brevital at doses of l-2 mg/
kg iv. It is known that such doses of short-acting
barbiturates induce rhythmic spindle sequences after 15-30 s, and several minutes later previous EEG
patterns resume spontaneously (22, 24). The re-

METHODS

Preparation and recordings
Acute experiments were conducted on 24 adult
cats. Eighteen animals were anesthetized with ket-

A

TRANSECT.

RIGHT

R.

I-14th

TRANSECT.

BILAT.

FIG. 3. Abolition of spindle rhythms in cortical electroencephalogram (EEG) after rostra1 thalamic transections.
Two experiments on brain stem-transected preparations. In A, original EEG recordings from right and left precruciate
gyri before thalamic transections (top); below, activity of the same leads after right transection; bottom, left transection
added. In B, cortical EEG activity filtered for spindles (7- 14 Hz) and slow waves (OS-4 Hz); right and left precruciate
EEG rhythms are shown before and after bilateral thalamic transections. Note in both A and B, abolition of spindles
and preservation of slow waves in cortical EEG after rostra1 thalamic transections.

STERIADE, DOMICH, OAKSON, AND DESCHI?NES

264

maining six animals underwent low collicular transections (Bremer’s cerveau isole preparations) under
ether anesthesia and exhibited spontaneous spindle
activity during recording. In addition to ketamine
anesthesia or brain stem transections, the wound
edges and pressure points were carefully and repeatedly infiltrated in all animals with xylocaine
2%. The animals were placed in a stereotaxic apparatus, paralyzed with gallamine triethiodide, and
artificially ventilated with CO2 level of the expired
air maintained at 3.8 t 0.2%. The internal temperature was kept between 37 and 39’.
In 15 of 24 animals frontal thalamic transections
were made in both hemispheres. The cuts were
made with a single-edged razor blade at plane 11 S12 by lowering the instrument for 20-22 mm from
the cortical surface and swinging it from the midline
to lateral planes 9- 10. After such transections, the
rostra1 pole of RE nucleus was completely disconnected from the posteriorly located thalamic nuclei
(Figs. 1 and 2). Even though it has been demonstrated that the cerebral cortex does not exhibit

spindle oscillations in athalamic animals (28), we
further attempted to deafferent the rostra1 pole of
RE nucleus not only from its thalamic inputs but
also from neocortical projections. In nine animals,
in addition to bilateral thalamic transections, we
made oblique transections of corona radiata from
the posterior or middle suprasylvian gyri to the orbital gyri. In such preparations (Fig. 2), we created
a triangular island in which the rostra1 pole of RE
nucleus coexisted with the caudate nucleus, putamen, entopeduncular
nucleus, nucleus basalis of
Meynert and adjacent basal forebrain areas, prepyriform cortex, and orbital area 12 around the
presylvian sulcus. The presence of these structures
in the island where RE recordings were made is
dealt with in DISCUSSION.
We introduced an array
of stimulating wires made from used microelectrodes (tips bared 0.1-0.2 mm, -0.5-l
mm apart)
into the white matter above the caudate nucleus
and tested the effect of bipolar stimulation (0.050.2 ms pulses, 0.1-0.2 mA) on the deafferented RE
nucleus.

EEG-R

EEG-L

2s
6

FIG. 4. Spindle rhythms in thalamically disconnected reticular (RE) nucleus. Recordings of focal waves by means
of a microelectrode inserted in the rostral pole of RE nucleus after bilateral thalamic transections. A-C 3 different
dorsal to ventral foci; A separated from C by - 1.4 mm. These spindle sequences were not seen dorsally to point A
and ventrally to point C. In A, B, and C, the 3 traces depict focal waves in RE nucleus, right and left EEG from the
surface of postcruciate gyri.

RHYTHMICITY

OF

DEAFFERENTED

Recordings of cortical EEG waves were made
from the surface of pericruciate and suprasylvian
gyri of both hemispheres. Discharges of single neurons and focal waves were extracellularly recorded
in the rostra1 pole of RE nucleus by tungsten microelectrodes (l-3 pm tip diam, 2-6 MQ at 1 kHz)
lowered just in front of thalamic transections, at
frontal planes 12- 13. Unit discharges and focal
waves were simultaneously recorded on direct (5010,000 Hz) and FM (l-700 Hz) channels of a tape

RE

265

NEURONS

recorder, along with surface cortical EEG waves and
trigger stimulation
pulses. In four experiments,
subconvulsive doses of bicuculline were administered intravenously (0.1 SO.20 mg/kg) to study their
effects on burst discharges of GABAergic RE neurons.
At the end of experiments, the animals were
deeply anesthetized with pentobarbital and perfused
intracardially
with formaldehyde and saline. Histology was done with horizontal and sagittal frozen

/%A

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

MSP
60
50
40
30
20
10

4

0

CSAI

CSPI
30

80
60

20

40

m

m

rl

10

20
0

I
5:03:00

EEG

l-

TIME

I
5:03:30

0

ipsi

FIG. 5.
Rhythmic
spindling
in rostra1 pole of reticular (RE) nucleus disconnected
from thalamic
and neocortical
projections.
At top, 2 computer-generated
graphs. First graph: filtered spindle waves (7- 14 Hz, MSP, continuous line)
and slow waves (OS-4 Hz MSA, bar graph) recorded by the microelectrode
in RE nucleus. Second graph: filtered
spindle waves (CSPI) and slow waves (CSAI) of ipsilateral neocortical electroencephalogram
(EEG). Ordinates represent
averaged amplitudes
that were normalized
between the highest (100%) and the lowest (0%) wave amplitudes
during a
given epoch. To preserve relative amplitudes
between spindles and slow waves, the 2 channels were normalized
to the
highest value of both channels (see further details in Ref. 25). Abscissas represent real time; moving average of three
0.5-s bins. Below, the five ink-written
traces depict the part indicated between arrows in the top computer-generated
graph: focal RE waves, filtered spindle waves from focal RE recording, ipsilateral EEG at the precruciate
cortical surface,
and filtered spindles and slow waves from ipsilateral
EEG. Note abolition
of spindles in ipsilateral
neocortex
(but
persistence of slow waves) afier rostral thalamic and corona radiata transections, contrasting
with persistence of rhythmic
spindle sequences in deafferented
RE. See further comments
on RE spindles in text.

STERIADE, DOMICH, OAKSON, AND DESCHCNES

266

sections (80 pm) stained with thionine
violet.

and cresyl

RESULTS

Analyses

Spontaneous and evoked spindle oscillations
in the deaferented RE nucleus

We plotted average amplitudes of cortical EEG
and RE focal waves as a function of time and analyzed filtered spindle waves between 7 and 16 Hz
and slow waves between 0.5 and 4 Hz (see Fig. 5).
The effects of short-term noise were avoided by
plotting data with a three-bin equally weighted
moving average (see further details on amplitude
normalization
of EEG and RE focal waves in Ref.
25). Discharges of single RE neurons were analyzed
sequentially together with simultaneously recorded
focal waves reflecting spindle oscillation in a pool
of neighboring RE cells (see Fig. 9).
To determine whether or not the disconnection
of RE neurons from their thalamic and cortical inputs may change the intrinsic structure of RE cells’
spike bursts, we made quantitative evaluations of
burst parameters in groups of deafferented RE neurons and compared these parameters with those
found in intact RE neurons (3). The criteria for
automatic computer selection of RE cells’ bursts
from the stored interval data bank were: the preburst
and postburst intervals were > 100 ms, and the sum
of the first 5 intervals in the burst did not exceed
100 ms.

Cortical EEG activity was recorded before
aswell asafter the right and left thalamic transections to ascertain that complete cuts of
thalamocortical projections were made, with
the consequence of abolishing cortical spindles. Following each successfulthalamic transection, spindles were abolished in ipsilateral
cortical leads, whereas slow waves were left
intact (Fig. 3). The preservation of cortical
slow waves is in keeping with previous data
on athalamic preparations (28).
In clear contrast with absenceof spindlesat
the cortical level and in ventroanterior (VA)
thalamic recordings just behind the transection, focal recordings in RE nucleus showed
waxing-and-waning spindles, grouped in sequencesthat recurred periodically (Figs. 4 and
5). In the deafferented RE nucleus, spindle
rhythmicity occurred without barbiturates in
brain stem-transected preparation and was induced by low dosesof Brevital in animals under ketamine anesthesia. At first sight, the

L---

L-_-_--A-

-.

--

-

----A

FIG. 6. Evoked oscillations in the deafferented RE nucleus (thalamic and cortical transections) by stimulating the
white matter overlying the caudate nucleus. Fifty averaged traces. A and B: recordings in two foci of the rostra1 RE
pole separated by 0.4 mm. Five shock-trains applied in each case. The series of 15- 16 Hz oscillatory waves begin with
a latency of -250 ms, after a triphasic field potentiel and last for -500 ms. Note similarity between events in A and
B, the on ly difference being that in A the shock-train triggers an initial upward (negative) deflection.

RHYTHMICITY

OF

DEAFFERENTED

spindle-related rhythms of the deafferented RE
nucleus were indistinguishable from those (714 Hz and 0.1-0.2 Hz) seenin the intact thalamus. Subtle differences were seen, however,
and they concerned the frequencies of both
rhythms. The frequency of spindle waves was
often in the upper range (14 Hz) and sometimes even higher (15 16 Hz). The relatively
high frequency of spontaneousspindles in the
disconnected RE nucleus fits in with the fre-

RE NEURONS

267

quency ( 15- 16 Hz) of oscillations evoked in
the same experiments by a pulse-train to the
white matter (Fig. 6). As to the slow rhythm
of spontaneously occurring spindle sequences,
instead of their periodic recurrence at 0.1-0.2
Hz seenin the intact RE nucleus (29, spontaneous spindle sequencesrecurred in many
instancesat 0.3 Hz in the deafferented RE nucleus (seeFigs. 4 and 5).
In somefoci of the deafferented RE nucleus,

A
1

50 ms

I

-

100

d ’ 20 ’ 2’0
ORD

'

4-T-90

ORD

lb
ORD

'

2'0

cl

ms

.

1.0
ORD

.

2-o

FIG. 7. Burst features of deafferented
reticular
(RE) neurons. Oscillographic
recordings
in A depict bursts of 2
different cells (A, I and 2, and A3) recorded in animals with brain stem transections;
negativity
upward. In B, plots
of median interval length (ordinate, in ms) versus serial or ordinal (ORD) position of intervals in the bursts (abscissa).
Bl-B3 are 3 different RE neurons; Bl recorded in brain stem-transected
preparation
and B, 2 and 3 in 2 preparations
with Brevital-induced
spindling;
2 1 bursts, 24 bursts, and 3 1 bursts were analyzed in Bl, B2, and B3, respectively.
B4
represents the 76 bursts of the 3 neurons.

268

STERIADE, DOMICH, OAKSON, AND DESCHENES

spindlerhythms were the only distinct activity,
the waves during interspindle lulls descending
to the level of background noise (Fig. 4, B and
C). In other adjacent foci, the whole spectrum
of waves with frequencies lower than 7 Hz was
seenbetween spontaneous spindle sequences
(Figs. 4A and 5).
We finally note that foci exhibiting spindle
oscillations were distributed throughout the
disconnected rostra1 pole of RE nucleus but,
along a microelectrode track, such foci could
be revealed in a restricted zone, whereasmore
dorsally or ventrally explored districts did not
show rhythmic activities. This was the caseof

100xPROB

sol

A

100xPROB

20

the experiment illustrated in Fig. 4 where
above focus A and below focus C, separated
bY - 1.5 mm, spontaneous spindle sequences
did not appear; and the experiment shown in
Fig. 6, where spindlelike oscillations could be
evoked from the white matter only within 1
mm of the microelectrode trajectory through
the RE nucleus.
Burst discharges in deaflerented
RE neurons and their relations

with focal spindle oscillations
Forty-five RE neurons were isolated and
their burst discharges were recorded during

B

1OOxPROB

20

1

16

16

40 -

30-

20-

10--

0 --

8

8

k.,
40

h

80

tlS

1OOxPROB
10

D

1

2$6

' 10'24

' 4Ob6

FIG. 8. Distribution of burst parameters in 350 bursts of 7 reticular (RE) cells recorded in different experimental
conditions: spontaneous spindling in brain stem-transected preparations and spindling precipitated by l-2 mg/kg
Brevital. Percent probability on ordinate; time (in milliseconds) on abscissa in A, B, and D; in C, number of burst
intervals on abscissa. A: duration of the 1st interval; B: duration of 1st 5 burst intervals; C: number of burst
intervals; D: burst duration.

RHYTHMICITY

OF

DEAFFERENTED

spontaneously
occurring
spindles in brain
stem-transected preparations or during spindle
sequences precipitated by l-2 mg/kg of Brevital in other animals.
As known (3, 29, the bursts of cat’s RE
cells during natural EEG synchronization
are
essentially different from those of thalamocortical neurons. In the latter, the spike bursts
are short (generally lo-20 ms), the intraburst
frequency is high (>250 Hz), and there is a
progressive lengthening in the duration of
successive intraburst intervals. In RE neurons,
the bursts have initially biphasic accelerandoritardando patterns, eventually leading to a
long-lasting tonic tail; altogether, the duration
of RE bursts is extremely variable and extends
between 50 ms and 1.5 s, with values most
often between 100 and 500 ms. These differences between bursts of RE and thalamocortical neurons are so striking that they indeed

100ms

iIII
’

RE NEURONS

269

assess, even before histology, that the microelectrode is within RE limits.
Figure 7 shows the initial acceleration followed by deceleration of discharges in bursts
of deafferented RE cells, the variability of successive bursts that may reach the peak frequency after five intervals (Fig. 7, Al) or after
two intervals (Fig. 7, A2), and the prolonged
tonic tail that appears after the core of the burst
(Fig. 7, A3). The intrinsic structure of the initial biphasic pattern is shown for three RE
neurons (Fig. 7, M-B3)
by plotting the median interval length versus the serial or ordinal
position of successive intervals in the bursts
(Fig. 7, B4 depicts the averaged values of all
three cells depicted in Fig. 7, M-B3). The parameters of 350 bursts recorded in different
experiments from seven deafferented RE neurons (Fig. 8) are as follows: the duration of the
first interval is between 5 and 15 ms in ~60%

iI

n

MSP
40

30
20
10
0

5:48:30

5:49:00

TIME

5:49:30

5:50:00

FIG. 9. Slow rhythm
of spindle sequences and burst oscillations
in deafferented
reticular (RE) nucleus by thalamic
and cortical transections.
Discharges of a single RE cell were simultaneously
recorded with focal spindle oscillations.
Sequential mean frequency
(SMF) of the neuron is depicted with the normalized
amplitudes
of focal waves filtered for
spindle waves (MSP). Abscissa indicates real time. At top, 2 bursts from this period, one consisting
of the biphasic
acceleration-deceleration
pattern, the other consisting of this core leading to the long-lasting
(0.7 s) tonic tail.

STERIADE, DOMICH, OAKSON, AND DESCHENES

270

more than half of all bursts having lo-30 intervals (Fig. 8C); and the duration of the whole
burst extends between 50 ms and 2 s, with two
peaks at loo-125 ms and at 0.5-l s (Fig. 80).

of bursts (Fig. 84; the total duration of the
progressively shorter first five intervals peaks
between 20 and 35 ms (Fig. 89; the number
of intervals peaks between 10 and 15, with

A

1100SnF
80
60
40

20
0

3:55:30
3

3:56:oo

601

4:05:00

3

3:56:3o

4: 05:30

4:06:00

100

80
60
40
20
0

4:16:30

B

4:17:00

4:18:00

4:17:30

I SnF

3:03:00

3:02:30

3:03:30

2 6040
20
0

I

I

I

I

3:o8:3o

3:12:oo

I

I

I

3:09:00

3:12:3o

n,

A

3:09:30

3:13:00

FIG. 10. Reduction of spike bursts in deafferented RE neurons by bicuculhne. A and B, 2 different neurons. Bicuculline
administered iv, 0.2 mg/kg. In both cases: 1, sequential mean frequency (SMF) in a control period, just before administration of bicuculline; 2, 8 min (A) and 5 min (B) after bicuculline administration; 3, recovery of the control pattern
(abscissas indicate real time).

RHYTHMICITY

OF

DEAFFERENTED

All these parameters are almost identical to
those analyzed quantitatively in bursts of RE
neurons with intact connections (3), and they
are very dissimilar to burst parameters of intact
(3, 11) or RE-deprived (24) thalamocortical
neurons.
Burst discharges of deafferented RE neurons
occurred in close time-relation
with focal
spindle oscillations, simultaneously
recorded
through the same microelectrode.
Both unit
and field events recurred periodically, with a
slow rhythm of 0.1-0.3 Hz (Fig. 9).
Since the burst discharges in a disconnected
RE nucleus are likely generated by the dendrodendritic
apparatus of GABAergic
RE
neurons (see DISCUSSION),
we attempted to
block the suspected inhibitory events underlying the bursts by using subconvulsive doses
of bicuculline. As in previous experiments
dealing with the effects of intravenous bicuculline on spontaneous (24) or evoked (4)
bursts of thalamic neurons, the maximum effect was reached in six investigated neurons
after quite long latencies, 5-9 min. Three neurons could be recorded for sufficient periods
of time to compare the effect of bicuculline
with control and recovery periods. The burst
occurrence per minute was determined by
computer selection of bursts, as defined according to the criteria indicated in METHODS.
The degree of bicuculline-induced
blockade
of bursts varied. In one neuron (depicted in
Fig. lOA), the burst occurrence was reduced
to half, compared with control and recovery
periods; in the two other neurons, the rates of
bursts during control and recovery periods
were 20 times (Fig. 1OB) or 9 times higher than
during the effect of bicuculline. The structure
of bursts that survived during the bicuculline
period was, however, very similar to that of
bursts recorded before and during the recovery
period.
DISCUSSION

The disconnection from the remaining thalamic nuclei was histologically complete in the
experiments reported here. We recorded in the
rostra1 pole of RE nucleus ~0.5 mm in front
of the thalamic transection (Figs. 1 and 2, A
and B) or at a distance of - 1 mm (Fig. 2, C
and 0). The disconnection
from cortically
projecting thalamic nuclei was further indicated by abolition of spindles in the ipsilateral

RE

NEURONS

271

cortical EEG after each transection. The difficulty of recording at 0.5- 1 mm apart from a
cut cannot be emphasized enough, and it explains the small number of cells in stable conditions that were used for quantitative analyses. The persistence of spindle oscillations in
the RE nucleus after total disconnection from
the other thalamic nuclei, with the consequence of abolishing spindles in cortical EEG,
would be sufficient to ascertain a pacemaker
role of RE nucleus in spindling, especially
since cortical transections were added in nine
animals. Nonetheless, we evaluate in what follows the possible role of other surviving structures in the triangular islands depicted in Fig.
2: 1) there is no available evidence for connections between caudate nucleus or putamen
and RE nucleus. As to the caudate, the connections with RE nucleus were denied in an
autoradiographic
study (9). The well-known
propensity to elicit spindles in relay thalamic
nuclei by electrical stimulation of the caudate
nucleus is best explained by antidromic invasion of intralaminar neurons projecting to
the striatum, with axon-reflex excitation of RE
neurons and subsequent phasic inhibition in
cortically projecting neurons. In some experiments, we mistakenly inserted the microelectrodes anteriorly to RE nucleus and could not
record any spindle oscillations in the caudate
or in the putamen. In fact, spindles survive in
central thalamic recordings not only after decortication (14) but also after more radical
surgery in which, in addition to the cerebral
cortex, the striatum and rhinencephalon were
also removed (28); 2) because of the high content of acetylcholinesterase
in the RE nucleus
(19), the possibility exists that, in addition to
the pathways from the cholinergic Ch5 group
of the caudal midbrain (see Refs. 8, 13, 29)
the RE nucleus receives projections from the
nucleus basalis of Meynert (Ch4 group). There
is no evidence of spindle oscillations within
nucleus basalis. Moreover, stimulation of another choline@
group (Ch5) leads to blockade of oscillatory behavior in the perigeniculate part of RE nucleus (unpublished data).
Summing up, then, the disappearance of
spindle rhythmicity in thalamic nuclei and cerebral cortex after selective lesions of RE nucleus by means of kainic acid (24) together
with the preservation of both spindle-related
rhythms
in the disconnected
RE nucleus

272

STERIADE,

DOMICH,

OAKSON,

demonstrate that RE nucleus generates spindle
rhythms. The isolation of RE nucleus in the
present experiments is probably what could
be done acutely in viva.’ At this point, we may
only hope that RE neurons will be investigated
in vitro and found to exhibit the oscillations
described here. Studies in vitro are also needed
to elucidate the ionic conductances that underly the complex burst patterns of RE neurons and their rhythmic oscillations. The RE
neurons have been recorded in guinea-pig
slices (6, 12). The lack of vesicle-containing
presynaptic dendritic profiles in the rodent RE
nucleus ( 17, 18) may require in vitro studies
in cat, a species that shows dendrodendritic
inhibitory synapses (1, 30) which are likely involved in the generation of rhythmic bursts in
feline RE neurons (see below).
The burst structure in deafferented RE neurons is very similar to that of RE neurons in
intact preparations. This sameness was also
observed by comparing the burst features of
RE-deprived
thalamocortical
neurons with
those of intact thalamic relay cells (24). While
the bursts of both thalamocortical
and RE
neurons are generated by their intrinsic cell
properties (2, 6, 7, 12, 15), the spindle-related
rhythmicity of bursts in thalamocortical
neurons disappears after RE disconnection (24),
whereas it is preserved in deafferented RE
neurons (see Fig. 9). Again, this finding points
to the pacemaker role of RE nucleus. Bursts
of RE neurons were greatly reduced by bicuculline, which supports the suggestion that
dendrodendritic
interactions
between GABAergic RE neurons play an essential role in
the synchronization
of oscillations (1). We assume that the dendritic hyperpolarization
through dendrodendritic
synapses of RE neu-

’ Another
type of experiment
would involve total decortication
and recording of RE neurons in chronic conditions, 5-6 mo or more after cortical ablation, to allow
retrograde
degeneration
of thalamocortical
neurons including their collaterals
to RE nucleus. We did such experiments but, as yet, did not succeed in degenerating
all
thalamocortical
neurons, especially in medial nuclei. Even
1 yr after ablation of visual cortex, 7% of lateral geniculate
relay neurons are found intact (lo), probably
because of
their collaterals to the perigeniculate
nucleus. To complicate the matter, thalamic neurons that project only to RE
nucleus, not by means of recurrent
collaterals of cortically
projecting
axons, would not degenerate after chronic decortication.

AND

DESCHCNES

rons (1, 30) would de-inactivate a low-threshold Ca2+ conductance with the consequence
of triggering a Ca2+ spike, followed by GABA
exocytosis and hyperpolarization
of postsynaptic dendrites; hyperpolarization
in the latter
dendrites would then de-inactivate the Ca2+
conductance and thus hyperpolarize synaptically coupled dendrites. In this way, oscillations could start at any point in the network
and spread to adjacent elements. It is, of
course, difficult inferring GABA effects at the
RE dendrodendritic
synapses based only on
the present results with bicuculline, without
further dose-response curves and other analyses. The spatial organization of RE dendrites
in tightly aggregated bundles (2 1) may explain
why we found rhythmic bursts and/or spindle
oscillations in some foci of the deafferented
RE nucleus, presumably within highly concentrated dendritic bundles, but not in adjacent zones of RE nucleus.
The presence of spindle oscillations in the
deafferented RE nucleus by no means excludes
that, in the normal condition of an intact
brain, other factors may be decisive in triggering the RE oscillator. During the onset of
natural sleep, the discharge rates of rostrally
projecting midbrain reticular neurons progressively slow down (26). This may lead to
hyperpolarization
through disfacilitation and
consequently to burst discharges in their thalamic targets. Such events may be effective in
setting into motion RE neurons by means of
collaterals of thalamocortical
neurons. Focal
spindle oscillations in various thalamic foci
would develop, however, into generalized and
synchronous spindling in all thalamocortical
systems
only by spread of oscillations
throughout the RE nuclear complex that, by
virtue of its generalized thalamic projections,
will induce rhythmic hyperpolarizations
in almost all relay nuclei.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank M. Cardinal,
P. Giguere, and D. Drolet for
technical assistance. L. Domich
was a graduate student.
M. Deschenes is a scholar from Le Fonds de la recherche
en Sante du Quebec. G. Oakson is a research fellow of the
Universite
Laval.
This work was supported by Grants MT-3689
and MT5877 from the Medical Research Council of Canada.
Received
1986.

11 April

1986; accepted

in final form

3 1 July

RHYTHMICITY

OF

DEAFFERENTED

RE NEURONS

273

REFERENCES
1. DESCH~NES,
M., MADARIAGA-DOMICH,
A., AND
STERIADE, M. Dendrodendritic
synapses in the cat
reticular-is thalami nucleus: a structural basis for thalamic spindle synchronization.
Brain Res. 334: 165168, 1985.
2, DESCHI?NES, M., PARADE, M., ROY, J. P., AND STERIADE, M. Electrophysiology
of neurons of lateral thalamic nuclei in cat: resting properties
and burst discharges. J. Neurophysiol. 5 1: 1196-12 19, 1984.
3 DOMICH,
L., OAKSON, G., AND STERIADE, M. Thalamic burst patterns in the naturally
sleeping cat: a
comparison
between
cortically-projecting
and reticularis neurones.
J. Physiol. Land. 379: 429-449,
1986.
4 DUGGAN, A. W. AND MCLENNAN,
H. Bicuculline and
inhibition
in the thalamus. Brain Res. 25: 188-19 1,
1971.
5 HOUSER, C. R., VAUGHN, J. E., BARBER, R. P., AND
ROBERTS, E. GABA neurons are the major cell type
of the nucleus reticularis thalami. Brain Res. 200: 34 l354, 1980.
6. JAHNSEN, H. AND LLINAS, R. Electrophysiological
properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurones: an in vitro
study. J. Physiol. Lond. 349: 205-226, 1984.
7. JAHNSEN, H. AND LLINAS, R. Ionic basis for the electroresponsiveness
and oscillatory properties of guineapig thalamic neurones in vitro. J. Physiol. Land. 349:
227-247,
1984.
8. JONES, B. E. AND YANG, T. Z. The efferent projections
from the reticular formation
and the locus coeruleus
studied by anterograde and retrograde axonal transport
in the rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 242: 56-92, 1985.
9. JONES, E. G. Some aspects of the organization
of the
thalamic
reticular
complex.
J. Comp. Neurol. 162:
285-308,
1975.
10. MADARASZ,
M., SOMOGYI, J., SILAKOV, V. L., AND
HAMORI, J. Residual neurons in the lateral geniculate
nucleus of adult cats following chronic disconnection
from the cortex. Exp. Brain Res. 52: 363-374, 1983.
11. MCCARLEY,
R. W., BENOIT, O., AND BARRIONIJEVO,
G. Lateral geniculate nucleus unitary discharge in sleep
and waking: state- and rate-specific
aspects. J. Neurophysiol. 50: 798-8 18, 1983.
12. MCCORMICK,
D. AND PRINCE, D. Acetylcholine
induces burst firing in thalamic
reticular
neurones by
activating
a potassium
conductance.
Nature Land.
3 19: 402-405,
1986.
13. MESULAM,
M. M., MUFSON, E. J., WAINER, B., AND
LEVEY, A. I. Central cholinergic
pathways in the rat:
an overview
based on an alternative
nomenclature.
Neuroscience 10: 1185-1201,
1983.
14. MORISON, R. S. AND BASSETT, D. L. Electrical activity
of the thalamus and basal ganglia in decorticate
cats.
J. Neurophysiol. 8: 309-3 14, 1945.
15. MULLE, C., MADARIAGA,
A., AND DESCH~NES, M.
Morphology
and electrophysiological
properties
of
reticularis thalami neurons in cat: in vivo study of a
thalamic pacemaker,
J. Neurosci. 6: 2 134-2 145, 1986.

16. MULLE, C., STERIADE, M., AND DESCH~NES, M. Absence of spindle oscillations in the cat anterior thalamic
nuclei. Brain Res. 334: 169-17 1, 1985.
17. OHARA, P. T. The Thalamic Reticular Nucleus of the
Rat: Experimental Anatomical studies (PhD thesis).
London:
University
College London,
198 1.
18. OHARA, P. T. AND LIEBERMAN,
A. R. The thalamic
reticular nucleus of the adult rat: experimental
anatomical studies. J. Neurocytol. 14: 365-4 11, 1985.
19. OLIVIER, A., PARENT, A., AND POIRIER, L. Identification of the thalamic nuclei on the basis of their cholinesterase content in the monkey. J. Anat. Land. 106:
37-50, 1970.
20. ROY, J. P., CLERCQ, M., STERIADE, M., AND DESCHI?NES, M. Electrophysiology
of neurons of lateral thalamic nuclei in cat: mechanisms
of long-lasting
hyperpolarizations.
J. Neurophysiol. 5 1: 1220- 1235,
1984.
21. SCHEIBEL, M. E. AND SCHEIBEL, A. B. Specialized
organization
patterns within the nucleus reticular-is
thalami of the cat. Exp. Neurol. 34: 3 16-322,
1972.
22. STERIADE, M., APOSTOL, V., AND OAKSON, G. Control of unitary activities in cerebellothalamic
pathways
during wakefulness
and synchronized
sleep. J. Neurophysiol. 34: 389-4 13, 197 1.
23. STERIADE, M. AND DESCHENES, M. The thalamus as
a neuronal oscillator. Brain Res. Rev. 8: l-63, 1984.
24. STERIADE, M., DESCH~NES, M., DOMICH,
L., AND
MULLE, C. Abolition
of spindle oscillations
in thalamic neurons disconnected
from nucleus reticularis
thalami. J. Neurophysiol. 54: 1473-1497,
1985.
25. STERIADE, M., DOMICH,
L., AND OAKSON, G. Reticularis thalami
neurons
revisited:
activity
changes
during shifts in states of vigilance. J. Neurosci. 6: 6881, 1986.
26. STERIADE, M., OAKSON, G., AND ROPERT, N. Firing
rates and patterns of midbrain reticular neurons during
steady and transitional
states of the sleep-waking
cycle.
Exp. Brain Res. 46: 37-5 1, 1982.
27. STERIADE, M., PARENT, A., AND HADA, J. Thalamic
projections of nucleus reticularis thalami of cat: a study
using retrograde
transport
of horseradish
peroxidase
and fluorescent
tracers. J. Comp. Neurol. 229: 53 l547, 1984.
28. VILLABLANCA,
J. Role of the thalamus in sleep control.
In: Basic Sleep Mechanisms, edited by 0. PetreQuadens and J. Schlag. New York: Academic,
1974,
p. 51-81.
29. WILSON, P. M. A photographic
perspective
on the
origins, form, course and relations of the acetylcholinesterase-containing
fibres of the dorsal tegmental
pathway in the rat brain. Brain Res. Rev. 10: 85- 118,
1985.
30. YEN, C. T., CONLEY, M., HENDRY, S. H. C., AND
JONES, E. G. The morphology
of physiologically
identified GABAergic
neurons in the somatic sensory
part of the thalamic
reticular
nucleus in the cat. J.
Neurosci. 5: 2254-2268, 1985.

